
1. Am J Epidemiol. 2015 Jul 1;182(1):49-57. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwv004. Epub 2015 May
13.

Association of Sleep Apnea and Snoring With Incident Atrial Fibrillation in the
Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis.

Lin GM, Colangelo LA, Lloyd-Jones DM, Redline S, Yeboah J, Heckbert SR, Nazarian 
S, Alonso A, Bluemke DA, Punjabi NM, Szklo M, Liu K.

The association between sleep apnea and atrial fibrillation (AF) has not been
examined in a multiethnic adult population in prospective community-based
studies. We prospectively (2000-2011) investigated the associations of
physician-diagnosed sleep apnea (PDSA), which is considered more severe sleep
apnea, and self-reported habitual snoring without PDSA (HS), a surrogate for mild
sleep apnea, with incident AF in white, black, and Hispanic participants in the
Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) who were free of clinical
cardiovascular disease at baseline (2000-2002). Cox proportional hazards models
were used to assess the associations, with adjustment for socioeconomic status,
traditional vascular disease risk factors, race/ethnicity, body mass index,
diabetes, chronic kidney disease, alcohol intake, and lipid-lowering therapy. Out
of 4,395 respondents to a sleep questionnaire administered in MESA, 181 reported 
PDSA, 1,086 reported HS, and 3,128 reported neither HS nor PDSA (unaffected).
Over an average 8.5-year follow-up period, 212 AF events were identified. As
compared with unaffected participants, PDSA was associated with incident AF in
the multivariable analysis, but HS was not (PDSA: hazard ratio = 1.76, 95%
confidence interval: 1.03, 3.02; HS: hazard ratio = 1.02, 95% confidence
interval: 0.72, 1.44). PDSA, a marker of more severe sleep apnea, was associated 
with higher risk of incident AF in this analysis of MESA data.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Johns
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4479113 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25977516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2015 Jun;114(6):470-9. doi:
10.1016/j.anai.2015.04.002. Epub 2015 Apr 29.

Acute exercise is associated with reduced exhaled nitric oxide in physically
inactive adults with asthma.

Scott HA(1), Latham JR(2), Callister R(3), Pretto JJ(4), Baines K(5), Saltos
N(6), Upham JW(7), Wood LG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Diseases, The University of Newcastle, New
Lambton Heights, New South Wales, Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences and
Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia;
Lung and Allergy Research Centre, School of Medicine, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic address:
Hayley.Scott@newcastle.edu.au. (2)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Diseases, The
University of Newcastle, New Lambton Heights, New South Wales, Australia; School 
of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New 
South Wales, Australia. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia. (4)Centre for
Asthma and Respiratory Diseases, The University of Newcastle, New Lambton
Heights, New South Wales, Australia; Department of Respiratory and Sleep
Medicine, John Hunter Hospital, New Lambton Heights, New South Wales, Australia. 
(5)Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Diseases, The University of Newcastle, New
Lambton Heights, New South Wales, Australia; School of Medicine and Public
Health, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, John Hunter Hospital, New
Lambton Heights, New South Wales, Australia. (7)Lung and Allergy Research Centre,
School of Medicine, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Although exercise has multiple health benefits, relatively little
attention has been paid to its potential therapeutic effects in those with
asthma.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of acute exercise on inflammation in physically
inactive and active adults with asthma.
METHODS: Fourteen adults with asthma (n = 6 physically inactive, n = 8 physically
active) completed (1) 30 minutes of moderate-intensity exercise on a treadmill
and (2) 30 minutes of rest in random order, with 4 weeks between sessions.
Exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) was measured before and after the intervention (0,
0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 24 hours). Blood inflammatory mediators were measured before
and after the intervention (0, 2, and 24 hours).
RESULTS: Physically inactive participants had a significant decrease in eNO 4
hours after exercise (-4.8 ppb, -6.4 to -0.5 ppb, P = .028), which was not
observed in physically active participants (P = .362). Interluekin-1 receptor
antagonist increased in the physically inactive group 2 hours after exercise,
with this increase strongly correlated with the decrease in eNO at 4 hours
(R = -0.685, P = .007) and 24 hours (R = -0.659, P = .014) after exercise.
Interleukin-6 was increased significantly 2 hours after exercise in physically
inactive participants. Blood neutrophils and nuclear factor erythroid 2-like 2
gene expression were increased 2 hours after exercise in the overall cohort.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that acute moderate-intensity exercise is
associated with decreased eNO in physically inactive adults with asthma and
suggests that interluekin-1 receptor antagonist could have a role in mediating
this effect. The attenuated response in physically active participants might be
due to the sustained anti-inflammatory effects of exercise training. Future
studies should investigate the impact of exercise intensity and exercise training
on airway inflammation in those with asthma.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry
(http://www.anzctr.org.au), registration number ACTRN12613001014741.

Copyright © 2015 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25935433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Natl Cancer Inst Monogr. 2014 Nov;2014(50):295-301. doi:
10.1093/jncimonographs/lgu028.

Tai chi, cellular inflammation, and transcriptome dynamics in breast cancer
survivors with insomnia: a randomized controlled trial.

Irwin MR(1), Olmstead R(2), Breen EC(2), Witarama T(2), Carrillo C(2), Sadeghi
N(2), Arevalo JM(2), Ma J(2), Nicassio P(2), Ganz PA(2), Bower JE(2), Cole S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA Semel Institute for
Neuroscience, Los Angeles, CA (MRI, RO, ECB, TW, CC, NS, JMGA, JM, PN, JEB, SC); 
Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences (MRI, RO, ECB, JMGA, JM, PN, 
JEB, SC), and Department of Medicine (JMGA, PAG, SC), UCLA David Geffen School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA; Division of Health Policy and Management, UCLA
Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA (PAG); Division of Cancer
Prevention and Control Research, UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los
Angeles, CA (MRI, PAG, JEB, SC); Department of Psychology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 
(MRI, JEB). mirwin1@ucla.edu. (2)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA
Semel Institute for Neuroscience, Los Angeles, CA (MRI, RO, ECB, TW, CC, NS,
JMGA, JM, PN, JEB, SC); Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences (MRI,
RO, ECB, JMGA, JM, PN, JEB, SC), and Department of Medicine (JMGA, PAG, SC), UCLA
David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA; Division of Health Policy and
Management, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los Angeles, CA (PAG);
Division of Cancer Prevention and Control Research, UCLA Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA (MRI, PAG, JEB, SC); Department of Psychology,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA (MRI, JEB).

BACKGROUND: Mind-body therapies such as Tai Chi are widely used by breast cancer 
survivors, yet effects on inflammation are not known. This study hypothesized
that Tai Chi Chih (TCC) would reduce systemic, cellular, and genomic markers of
inflammation as compared with cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia (CBT-I).
METHODS: In this randomized trial for the treatment of insomnia, 90 breast cancer
survivors with insomnia were assigned to TCC or CBT-I for 2-hour sessions weekly 
for 3 months. At baseline and postintervention, blood samples were obtained for
measurement of C-reactive protein and toll-like receptor-4-activated monocyte
production of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF), with a
random subsample (n = 48) analyzed by genome-wide transcriptional profiling.
RESULTS: Levels of C-reactive protein did not change in the TCC and CBT-I groups.
Levels of toll-like receptor-4-activated monocyte production of IL-6 and TNF
combined showed an overall reduction in TCC versus CBT-I (P < .02), with similar 
effects for IL-6 (P = .07) and TNF (P < .05) alone. For genome-wide
transcriptional profiling of circulating peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
expression of genes encoding proinflammatory mediators showed an overall
reduction in TCC versus CBT-I (P = .001). TELiS promoter-based bioinformatics
analyses implicated a reduction of activity of the proinflammatory transcription 
factor, nuclear factor-κB, in structuring these differences.
CONCLUSIONS: Among breast cancer survivors with insomnia, 3 months of TCC reduced
cellular inflammatory responses, and reduced expression of genes encoding
proinflammatory mediators. Given the link between inflammation and cancer, these 
findings provide an evidence-based molecular framework to understand the
potential salutary effects of TCC on cancer survivorship.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4411534
PMID: 25749595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Sleep Med. 2015 Mar;16(3):347-57. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2014.12.007. Epub 2015 Jan
15.

Biomarkers associated with obstructive sleep apnea and morbidities: a scoping
review.

De Luca Canto G(1), Pachêco-Pereira C(2), Aydinoz S(3), Major PW(2), Flores-Mir
C(2), Gozal D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, 
SC, Brazil; School of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Edmonton
Clinic Health Academy, University of Alberta, 11405-87 Avenue, Edmonton, Alberta 
T6G 1C9, Canada. (2)School of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry,
Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, University of Alberta, 11405-87 Avenue, Edmonton,
Alberta T6G 1C9, Canada. (3)GATA Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey; 
Section of Pediatric Sleep Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, The University of 
Chicago, USA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Pritzker School of Medicine,
Biological Sciences Division, The University of Chicago, 5721 S. Maryland Avenue,
MC 8000, Suite K-160, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address:
dgozal@uchicago.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To map potential biomarkers of obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA)-associated morbidities in both adults and children, to identify gaps in
current evidence, and to determine the value of conducting a full systematic
review.
METHODS: A scoping review was undertaken of studies in patients with OSA that
evaluated the potential value of biological markers in identifying OSA-associated
morbidities. Retained articles were only those studies whose main objective was
to identify morbidity biomarkers in subjects with OSA, the latter being confirmed
with a full overnight polysomnography (PSG) in a laboratory or at-home settings. 
The methodology of the selected studies was classified using an adaptation of the
evidence quality criteria recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics.
Additionally the biomarkers were categorized according to their potential
clinical applicability.
RESULTS: 572 citations were identified of which 48 met inclusion criteria.
Thirty-four studies were conducted in adults and 14 involved children. Most of
the studies evaluated blood biomarkers, and presented 31 potential diagnostic
biomarkers.
CONCLUSION: The majority of studies that performed explored blood-based
biomarkers, with most not identifying definitive morbidity biomarkers. Of the
potentially promising morbidity biomarkers, plasma IL-6 and high sensitivity
C-reactive protein appear to exhibit a favorable profile, and may discriminate
OSA patients with and without morbidities in both adults and children. MRP 8/14
was retained in children as well as cardiovascular morbidity-associated
biomarker. Urinary neurotransmitters may also provide a good tool for screening
OSA cognitive morbidity in children.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25747333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;100(3):E416-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2566. Epub
2015 Feb 10.

Napping reverses the salivary interleukin-6 and urinary norepinephrine changes
induced by sleep restriction.

Faraut B(1), Nakib S, Drogou C, Elbaz M, Sauvet F, De Bandt JP, Léger D.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, APHP, Hôtel Dieu de Paris,
Centre du Sommeil et de la Vigilance (B.F., C.D., M.E., F.S., D.L.), EA 7330
VIFASOM, Paris, France; Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, APHP,
Hôtel Dieu de Paris, Laboratoire de Chimie Clinique et Laboratoire de Biologie de
la Nutrition (S.N., J-P.D.), EA 4466, Centre de Recherche Pharmaceutique de
Paris, France; IRBA (Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées) (C.D., F.S.), 
Unité Fatique Vigilance, Paris, France.

CONTEXT: Neuroendocrine and immune stresses imposed by chronic sleep restriction 
are known to be involved in the harmful cardiovascular effects associated with
poor sleep.
OBJECTIVES: Despite a well-known beneficial effect of napping on alertness, its
effects on neuroendocrine stress and immune responses after sleep restriction are
largely unknown.
DESIGN: This study was a strictly controlled (sleep-wake status, light
environment, caloric intake), crossover, randomized design in continuously
polysomnography-monitored subjects.
SETTING: The study was conducted in a laboratory-based study.
PARTICIPANTS: The subjects were 11 healthy young men.
INTERVENTION: We investigated the effects on neuroendocrine and immune biomarkers
of a night of sleep restricted to 2 h followed by a day without naps or with 30
minute morning and afternoon naps, both conditions followed by an ad libitum
recovery night starting at 20:00.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Salivary interleukin-6 and urinary catecholamines were
assessed throughout the daytime study periods.
RESULTS: The increase in norepinephrine values seen at the end of the afternoon
after the sleep-restricted night was not present when the subjects had the
opportunity to take naps. Interleukin-6 changes observed after sleep deprivation 
were also normalized after napping. During the recovery day in the no-nap
condition, there were increased levels of afternoon epinephrine and dopamine,
which was not the case in the nap condition. A recovery night after napping was
associated with a reduced amount of slow-wave sleep compared to after the no-nap 
condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that napping has stress-releasing and immune
effects. Napping could be easily applied in real settings as a countermeasure to 
the detrimental health consequences of sleep debt.

PMID: 25668196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Transl Res. 2015 Jul;166(1):57-69. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.01.001. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Maresin-1 reduces airway inflammation associated with acute and repetitive
exposures to organic dust.

Nordgren TM(1), Bauer CD(2), Heires AJ(1), Poole JA(1), Wyatt TA(3), West WW(2), 
Romberger DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Neb. (2)Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Neb.
(3)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Research Service and Pulmonary,
Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Neb; Department of Environmental,
Agricultural, and Occupational Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Neb. (4)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department
of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Neb; VA
Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System, Research Service and Pulmonary,
Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Division, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Neb. Electronic address:
dromberg@unmc.edu.

Agriculture industry workers are at a higher risk for chronic bronchitis and
obstructive pulmonary diseases, and current therapeutics are not entirely
effective. We previously found that the specialized proresolving lipid mediator
maresin-1 (MaR1) reduced proinflammatory cytokine release and intracellular
adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression in bronchial epithelial cells exposed to 
extracts of organic dust (DE) derived from swine confinement facilities in vitro.
The objective of this study was to determine whether MaR1 is effective at
limiting lung inflammation associated with acute and repetitive exposures to DE
in an established murine model of inhalant dust exposures. C57Bl/6 mice were
treated with MaR1 or vehicle control and intranasally instilled with DE once or
daily for 3 weeks. Bronchioalveolar lavage fluid was analyzed for total and
differential cell counts and proinflammatory cytokine levels, and lung tissues
were assessed for histopathology and ICAM-1 expression. In both single and
repetitive DE exposure studies, MaR1 significantly decreased bronchoalveolar
lavage neutrophil infiltration, interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor α, and
chemokine C-X-C motif ligand 1 levels without altering repetitive DE-induced
bronchioalveolar inflammation or lymphoid aggregate formation. Lung tissue ICAM-1
expression was also reduced in both single and repetitive exposure studies. These
data suggest that MaR1 might contribute to an effective strategy to reduce airway
inflammatory diseases induced by agricultural-related organic dust environmental 
exposures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4458456 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25655838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2015 Mar;53:256-67. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2015.01.010. Epub 2015 Jan 20.

Diurnal cortisol and survival in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Schrepf A(1), Thaker PH(2), Goodheart MJ(3), Bender D(4), Slavich GM(5), Dahmoush
L(6), Penedo F(7), DeGeest K(8), Mendez L(9), Lubaroff DM(10), Cole SW(11), Sood 
AK(12), Lutgendorf SK(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. Electronic address: Andrew-schrepf@uiowa.edu. (2)Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Washington University School of Medicine, Maternity
Building-660 South Euclid, Campus Box 8064, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic 
address: thakerp@wudosis.wustl.edu. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, USA. Electronic address:
michael-goodheart@uiowa.edu. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address:
david-bender@uiowa.edu. (5)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, University
of California, Los Angeles, 300 Medical Plaza Driveway, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of
California, Los Angeles, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
Electronic address: GSlavich@mednet.ucla.edu. (6)Department of Urology,
University of Iowa, 3 Roy Carver Pavilion, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242,
USA; Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA. Electronic address: laila-dahmoush@uiowa.edu. (7)Department of
Medical Social Sciences, Northwestern University, 633 N. Saint Clair St., 19th
Floor, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Northwestern University, 446 East Ontario, #7-200, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
Electronic address: fpenedo@northwestern.edu. (8)Division of Gynecologic
Oncology, Oregon Health & Science University, Center for Women's Health, Kohler
Pavilion, 7th Floor, 808 S.W. Campus Drive, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Florida International University
School of Medicine, 5000 University Dr, Coral Gables, FL 33146, USA. Electronic
address: lemendez@comcast.net. (10)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa,
200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address:
David-lubaroff@uiowa.edu. (11)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology,
University of California, Los Angeles, 300 Medical Plaza Driveway, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of
California, Los Angeles, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA;
Department of Medicine, UCLA School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, 10833 Le Conte Ave, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
coles@ucla.edu. (12)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, UT MD Anderson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, 1155 Herman Pressler, Unit Number: 1362, Houston, TX
77030, USA; Department of Cancer Biology, UT MD Anderson Comprehensive Cancer
Center, 1155 Herman Pressler, Unit Number: 1362, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Electronic address: asood@mdanderson.org. (13)Department of Psychology,
University of Iowa, E11 Seashore Hall, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA
52242, USA; Department of Urology, University of Iowa, 3 Roy Carver Pavilion, 200
Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA; Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. Electronic address:
susan-lutgendorf@uiowa.edu.

INTRODUCTION: Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) deregulation is commonly
observed in cancer patients, but its clinical significance is not well
understood. We prospectively examined the association between HPA activity,
tumor-associated inflammation, and survival in ovarian cancer patients prior to
treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Participants were 113 women with ovarian cancer who
provided salivary cortisol for three days prior to treatment for calculation of
cortisol slope, variability, and night cortisol. Cox proportional hazard
regression analyses were used to examine associations between cortisol and
survival in models adjusting for disease stage, tumor grade, cytoreduction and
age. On a subsample of 41 patients with advanced disease ascites fluid was
assayed for levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and correlated with cortisol
variables.
RESULTS: Each cortisol measure was associated with decreased survival time,
adjusting for covariates (all p<.041). A one standard deviation increase in night
cortisol was associated with a 46% greater likelihood of death. Patients in the
high night cortisol group survived an estimated average of 3.3 years compared to 
7.3 years for those in the low night cortisol group. Elevated ascites IL-6 was
associated with each cortisol measure (all r>36, all p<.017).
DISCUSSION: Abnormal cortisol rhythms assessed prior to treatment are associated 
with decreased survival in ovarian cancer and increased inflammation in the
vicinity of the tumor. HPA abnormalities may reflect poor endogenous control of
inflammation, dysregulation caused by tumor-associated inflammation, broad
circadian disruption, or some combination of these factors. Nocturnal cortisol
may have utility as a non-invasive measure of HPA function and/or disease
severity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4440672 [Available on 2016-03-01]
PMID: 25647344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Nov 13;16 Suppl 2:S3. doi: 10.1186/ar4687.

Circadian rhythms in rheumatology--a glucocorticoid perspective.

Spies CM, Straub RH, Cutolo M, Buttgereit F.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis plays an important role in
regulating and controlling immune responses. Dysfunction of the HPA axis has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and other rheumatic
diseases. The impact of glucocorticoid (GC) therapy on HPA axis function also
remains a matter of concern, particularly for longer treatment duration.
Knowledge of circadian rhythms and the influence of GC in rheumatology is
important: on the one hand we aim for optimal treatment of the daily undulating
inflammatory symptoms, for example morning stiffness and swelling; on the other, 
we wish to disturb the HPA axis as little as possible. This review describes
circadian rhythms in RA and other chronic inflammatory diseases, dysfunction of
the HPA axis in RA and other rheumatic diseases and the recent concept of the
hepato-hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal-renal axis, the problem of adrenal
suppression by GC therapy and how it can be avoided, and evidence that
chronotherapy with modified release prednisone effective at 02:00 a.m. can
inhibit proinflammatory sequelae of nocturnal inflammation better compared with
GC administration in the morning but does not increase the risk of HPA axis
insufficiency in RA.

PMCID: PMC4249493
PMID: 25608777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Immunol Methods. 2015 Feb;417:124-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2015.01.002. Epub 2015
Jan 10.

A suction blister model reliably assesses skin barrier restoration and immune
response.

Smith TJ(1), Wilson MA(1), Young AJ(1), Montain SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Military Nutrition Division, United States Army Research Institute of
Environmental Medicine, Natick, MA, United States.

Skin wound healing models can be used to detect changes in immune function in
response to interventions. This study used a test-retest format to assess the
reliability of a skin suction blister procedure for quantitatively evaluating
human immune function in repeated measures type studies. Up to eight suction
blisters (~30 mm(2)) were induced via suction on each participant's left and
right forearm (randomized order; blister session 1 and 2), separated by
approximately one week. Fluid was sampled from each blister, and the top layer of
each blister was removed to reveal up to eight skin wounds. Fluid from each wound
was collected 4, 7 and 24h after blisters were induced, and proinflammatory
cytokines were measured. Transepidermal water loss (TEWL), to assess skin barrier
recovery, was measured daily at each wound site until values were within 90% of
baseline values (i.e., unbroken skin). Sleep, stress and inflammation (i.e.,
factors that affect wound healing and immune function), preceding the blister
induction, were assessed via activity monitors (Actical, Philips Respironics,
Murrysville, Pennsylvania), the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) and C-reactive
protein (CRP), respectively. Area-under-the-curve and TEWL, between blister
session 1 and 2, were compared using Pearson correlations and partial
correlations (controlling for average nightly sleep, PSS scores and CRP). The
suction blister method was considered reliable for assessing immune response and 
skin barrier recovery if correlation coefficients reached 0.7. Volunteers (n=16; 
12 M; 4F) were 23 ± 5 years [mean ± SD]. Time to skin barrier restoration was 4.9
± 0.8 and 4.8 ± 0.9 days for sessions 1 and 2, respectively. Correlation
coefficients for skin barrier restoration, IL-6, IL-8 and MIP-1α were 0.9
(P<0.0001), 0.7 (P=0.008) and 0.9 (P<0.0001), respectively. When average nightly 
sleep, PSS scores and CRP (i.e., percent difference between sessions 1 and 2)
were taken into consideration, correlations in immune response between sessions 1
and 2 were improved for IL-8 (0.8, P=0.002) and TNF-α (0.7, P=0.02). The skin
suction blister method is sufficiently reliable for assessing skin barrier
restoration and immune responsiveness. This data can be used to determine sample 
sizes for cross-sectional or repeated-measures types of studies testing the
impact of various stressors on immune response, and/or the efficacy of
interventions to mitigate decrements in immune response to stress.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25585263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Sleep Res. 2015 Jun;24(3):296-304. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12259. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

Sleep characteristics as predictor variables of stress systems markers in
insomnia disorder.

Floam S(1), Simpson N(2), Nemeth E(3), Scott-Sutherland J(3), Gautam S(3), Haack 
M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. (2)Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA. (3)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

This study investigates the extent to which sleep characteristics serve as
predictor variables for inflammatory, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and
autonomic systems markers. Twenty-nine participants with a diagnosis of insomnia 
disorder based on the Diagnostic Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth
Edition (age 25.3 ± 1.6 years, insomnia duration 6.6 ± 0.8 years) and 19 healthy 
control sleepers (age 25.4 ± 1.4 years) underwent a 2-week at-home evaluation
keeping a sleep diary and wearing an actigraph, followed by a visit to the
Research Center to measure blood pressure, and collect blood and urine samples.
The actigraphy- and diary-based variables of sleep duration, sleep-onset latency,
wake after sleep onset and sleep fragmentation/number of night-time awakenings
were averaged and entered as dependent variables in regression analyses.
Composite scores were calculated for the autonomic (blood pressure,
norepinephrine), inflammatory (monocyte counts, interleukin-6, C-reactive
protein) and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal systems (cortisol), and used as
predictor variables in regression models. Compared with controls, individuals
with insomnia had a shorter sleep duration (P < 0.05), and a higher
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and inflammatory composite score (P < 0.05). The
higher inflammatory score was mainly due to higher circulating monocytes (P <
0.05), rather than differences in interleukin-6 or C-reactive protein. In
persistent insomnia disorder, cortisol is upregulated and associated with
actigraphy- and diary-based wake after sleep onset, suggesting that wake after
sleep onset may serve as a marker to identify individuals at increased risks for 
disorders associated with a hyperactive hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system.
The absence of autonomic and pro-inflammatory changes (interleukin-6, C-reactive 
protein), despite a substantial decrease in actigraphic sleep duration, may
relate to a higher resilience to the adverse biological consequences of insomnia 
in this young age group.

© 2014 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 25524529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Sleep Med. 2015 Jan;16(1):113-8. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2014.07.027. Epub 2014 Nov 
11.

Association of inflammation and oxidative stress with obstructive sleep apnea in 
ischemic stroke patients.

Chen CY(1), Chen CL(2), Yu CC(3), Chen TT(4), Tseng ST(4), Ho CH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Electronic address: jongyau@cgmh.org.tw.
(2)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Early Intervention, College of
Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (3)School of Medicine, College 
of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan; Division of Pulmonary,
Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, Taiwan; School of
Medicine, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: The role of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in the mortality and further
cardiovascular risk in subjects with ischemic stroke remains a contentious issue.
Oxidative stress and inflammatory reaction due to OSA have seldom been studied in
stable ischemic stroke patients.
PATIENTS/METHODS: This cross-sectional, prospective study involved 92 consecutive
ischemic stroke patients who were admitted to the Rehabilitation ward. All
subjects received polysomnography and laboratory tests for oxidative stress and
inflammatory biomarkers, including: C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin 6
(IL-6), total antioxidant capacity (TAC), and urinary 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine.
Differences in study variables between patients with or without severe OSA were
compared, and multivariate linear regression analyses were used to assess the
relationship between OSA severity and target biomarkers.
RESULTS: Participants in the severe OSA group were significantly older
(p = 0.002), had a significantly higher risk of hypertension (p = 0.021) and a
lower level of CRP (p = 0.006). Among the subjects with ischemic stroke and
severe OSA, the levels of CRP, IL-6, and TAC were positively correlated with the 
desaturation index (DI) and the TAC levels were negatively correlated with mean
arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2). Regression analysis results indicated that the
TAC levels remained significantly and negatively correlated with mean SaO2
levels. Moreover, the CRP levels remained significantly correlated with the
apnea-hypopnea index and DI after controlling for covariates.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that a preferentially adaptive
antioxidative response to hypoxia emerges, and the role of OSA with respect to
inflammatory reaction is attenuated, in ischemic stroke patients with OSA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25439077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2014 Jul-Sep;25(3):52-7. doi: 10.1684/ecn.2014.0356.

Effect of acute sleep deprivation and recovery on Insulin-like Growth Factor-I
responses and inflammatory gene expression in healthy men.

Chennaoui M(1), Drogou C(1), Sauvet F(1), Gomez-Merino D(1), Scofield DE(2),
Nindl BC(3).

Author information: 
(1)French Armed Forces Biomedical Research Institute (IRBA), Neurosciences and
Operational Constraints department, Brétigny-sur-Orge, France, Université Paris
Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, EA7330 VIFASOM, équipe d'accueil Vigilance
Fatigue et Sommeil, Paris, France. (2)The Military Performance Division, the
Unites States Army Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Natick, MA
01760, United States. (3)The U.S. Army Institute of Public Health, The U.S. Army 
Public Health Command, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD 21010.

Acute sleep deprivation in humans has been found to increase inflammatory markers
and signaling pathways in the periphery through a possible Toll-like receptor 4
(TLR-4). In addition, short duration sleep has been associated with low
circulating total Insulin-like Growth Factor-I (IGF-I) concentrations. We aimed
to determine whether a total sleep deprivation (TSD) protocol with recovery
altered whole-blood gene expression of the proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α and
IL-6, as well as TLR-4 expression, and to examine the relationship with
circulating concentrations of the IGF-I system. Twelve healthy men participated
in a five-day TSD (two control nights followed by one night of sleep deprivation 
and one night of recovery). Blood was sampled at 0800, before and after sleep
deprivation (D2 and D4), and after recovery (D5). It is shown that 25 h of sleep 
deprivation (D4) induced significant increases in mRNA levels of TNF-α and its
soluble receptor R1 (P<0.01 respectively), as well as TLR-4 (P<0.05), while IL-6 
mRNA levels remained unchanged. Circulating concentrations of free IGF-I were
decreased at D4 (P<0.001). One night of recovery was sufficient to restore basal 
expression levels for TNF-α, sTNF-R1, TLR-4 and circulating IGF-I. Changes in
TLR-4 mRNA levels during the protocol correlated positively with those of TNF-α
and sTNF-R1 (r=0.393 and r=0.490 respectively), and negatively with circulating
free IGF-I (r=-0.494). In conclusion, 25 h of sleep deprivation in healthy
subjects is sufficient to induce transient and reversible genomic expression of
the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α and its R1 receptor, and its mediator TLR-4, 
with a possible link to IGF-I axis inhibition.

PMID: 25373853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Sleep Res. 2015 Apr;24(2):148-59. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12252. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Effects of obesity on the association between long-term sleep apnea treatment and
changes in interleukin-6 levels: the Icelandic Sleep Apnea Cohort.

Arnardottir ES(1), Lim DC, Keenan BT, Maislin G, Benediktsdottir B, Juliusson S, 
Pack AI, Gislason T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Sleep, Landspitali-The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Faculty of Medicine,
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland; Center for Sleep and Circadian
Neurobiology, Division of Sleep Medicine/Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The aim of this study was to evaluate changes in interleukin (IL)-6 and soluble
IL-6 receptor levels in obstructive sleep apnea patients and assess the role of
positive airway pressure treatment and obesity on these changes. A total of 309
newly diagnosed subjects with sleep apnea from the Icelandic Sleep Apnea Cohort
were referred for treatment and reassessed at a 2-year follow-up. Full treatment 
was defined objectively as use ≥ 4 h day(-1) and ≥ 20 days month(-1). At the
2-year follow-up, there were 177 full users, 44 partial users and 88 non-users.
The mean change in biomarker levels from baseline to the 2-year follow-up was
assessed in a primary model that included adjustment for baseline biomarker
levels, baseline body mass index and change in body mass index, as well as after 
adjustment for numerous relevant covariates. No significant overall difference in
IL-6 level change was found among full, partial and non-users. However, in
severely obese patients (body mass index ≥ 35), a significant increase in IL-6
levels during the 2-year period was found in partial and non-users, compared to
no change in full users. Results were attenuated in a smaller propensity score
matched subsample, although similar trends were observed. No differences were
found in soluble IL-6 receptor levels between full users and non-users, after
adjustment for confounders. In conclusion, among untreated obese sleep apnea
patients, IL-6 levels increase substantially during 2 years, while adherence to
positive airway pressure treatment may prevent further increases in this
inflammatory biomarker.

© 2014 European Sleep Research Society.

PMCID: PMC4351148 [Available on 2016-04-01]
PMID: 25359691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Sleep. 2015 Feb 1;38(2):189-95. doi: 10.5665/sleep.4394.

Association between sleep duration and mortality is mediated by markers of
inflammation and health in older adults: the Health, Aging and Body Composition
Study.

Hall MH(1), Smagula SF(2), Boudreau RM(2), Ayonayon HN(3), Goldman SE(2), Harris 
TB(4), Naydeck BL(2), Rubin SM(3), Samuelsson L(5), Satterfield S(6), Stone
KL(7), Visser M(8), Newman AB(2,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, PA. (2)Graduate School of Public Health, Department of
Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. (3)Departments of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA. (4)Laboratory of Epidemiology, Demography and Biometry, Intramural
Research Program, National Institute on Aging, Bethesda, MD. (5)Department of
Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA. (6)Department of Preventive
Medicine, University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN. (7)San Francisco Coordinating
Center, California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA. 
(8)Institute of Health Sciences, VU University Medical Center and EMGO Institute,
VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (9)Graduate School of Public
Health, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Inflammation may represent a common physiological pathway
linking both short and long sleep duration to mortality. We evaluated
inflammatory markers as mediators of the relationship between sleep duration and 
mortality in community-dwelling older adults.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort with longitudinal follow-up for mortality outcomes.
SETTING: Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and Memphis, Tennessee.
PARTICIPANTS: Participants in the Health, Aging and Body Composition (Health ABC)
Study (mean age 73.6 ± 2.9 years at baseline) were sampled and recruited from
Medicare listings.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Baseline measures of subjective sleep duration, markers
of inflammation (serum interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α, and C-reactive
protein) and health status were evaluated as predictors of all-cause mortality
(average follow-up = 8.2 ± 2.3 years). Sleep duration was related to mortality,
and age-, sex-, and race-adjusted hazard ratios (HR) were highest for those with 
the shortest (< 6 h HR: 1.30, CI: 1.05-1.61) and longest (> 8 h HR: 1.49, CI:
1.15-1.93) sleep durations. Adjustment for inflammatory markers and health status
attenuated the HR for short (< 6 h) sleepers (HR = 1.06, 95% CI = 0.83-1.34).
Age-, sex-, and race-adjusted HRs for the > 8-h sleeper group were less strongly 
attenuated by adjustment for inflammatory markers than by other health factors
associated with poor sleep with adjusted HR = 1.23, 95% CI = 0.93-1.63.
Inflammatory markers remained significantly associated with mortality.
CONCLUSION: Inflammatory markers, lifestyle, and health status explained
mortality risk associated with short sleep, while the mortality risk associated
with long sleep was explained predominantly by lifestyle and health status.

© 2015 Associated Professional Sleep Societies, LLC.

PMCID: PMC4288599
PMID: 25348127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Clin Sleep Med. 2015 Jan 15;11(1):27-36. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.4358.

Diagnostic capability of biological markers in assessment of obstructive sleep
apnea: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

De Luca Canto G(1,)(2), Pachêco-Pereira C(2), Aydinoz S(3,)(4), Major PW(2),
Flores-Mir C(2), Gozal D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dentistry, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis, 
SC, Brazil. (2)School of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University
of Alberta, Canada. (3)GATA Haydarpasa Teaching Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this systematic review is to evaluate the diagnostic
value of biological markers (exhaled breath condensate, blood, salivary and
urinary) in the diagnosis of OSA in comparison to the gold standard of nocturnal 
PSG.
METHODS: Studies that differentiated OSA from controls based on PSG results,
without age restriction, were eligible for inclusion. The sample of selected
studies could include studies in obese patients and with known cardiac disease. A
detailed individual search strategy for each of the following bibliographic
databases was developed: Cochrane, EMBASE, MEDLINE, PubMed, and LILACS. The
references cited in these articles were also crosschecked and a partial grey
literature search was undertaken using Google Scholar. The methodology of
selected studies was evaluated using the 14-item Quality Assessment Tool for
Diagnostic Accuracy Studies.
RESULTS: After a two-step selection process, nine articles were identified and
subjected to qualitative and quantitative analyses. Among them, only one study
conducted in children and one in adults found biomarkers that exhibit
sufficiently satisfactory diagnostic accuracy that enables application as a
diagnostic method for OSA.
CONCLUSION: Kallikrein-1, uromodulin, urocotin-3, and orosomucoid-1 when combined
have enough accuracy to be an OSA diagnostic test in children. IL-6 and IL-10
plasma levels have potential to be good biomarkers in identifying or excluding
the presence of OSA in adults.

© 2015 American Academy of Sleep Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4265655
PMID: 25325575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Sleep. 2015 Feb 1;38(2):205-11. doi: 10.5665/sleep.4398.

Sleep deprivation and divergent toll-like receptor-4 activation of cellular
inflammation in aging.

Carroll JE(1), Carrillo C(1), Olmstead R(1), Witarama T(1), Breen EC(1), Yokomizo
M(1), Seeman T(2), Irwin MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Cousins Center for
Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Los
Angeles, CA. (2)University of California, Los Angeles, CA; Department of
Geriatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA.

OBJECTIVES: Sleep disturbance and aging are associated with increases in
inflammation, as well as increased risk of infectious disease. However, there is 
limited understanding of the role of sleep loss on age-related differences in
immune responses. This study examines the effects of sleep deprivation on
toll-like receptor activation of monocytic inflammation in younger compared to
older adults.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Community-dwelling adults (n = 70) who were
categorized as younger (25-39 y old, n = 21) and older (60-84 y old, n = 49)
participants, underwent a sleep laboratory-based experimental partial sleep
deprivation (PSD) protocol including adaptation, an uninterrupted night of sleep,
sleep deprivation (sleep restricted to 03:00-07:00), and recovery.
MEASUREMENT AND RESULTS: Blood samples were obtained each morning to measure
toll-like receptor-4 activation of monocyte intracellular production of the
inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α). 
Partial sleep deprivation induced a significant increase in the production of
IL-6 and/or TNF-α that persisted after a night of recovery sleep (F(2,121.2) =
3.8, P < 0.05). Age moderated the effects of sleep loss, such that younger adults
had an increase in inflammatory cytokine production that was not present in older
adults (F(2,121.2) = 4.0, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Older adults exhibit reduced toll-like receptor 4 stimulated cellular
inflammation that, unlike in younger adults, is not activated after a night of
partial sleep loss. Whereas sleep loss increases cellular inflammation in younger
adults and may contribute to inflammatory disorders, blunted toll-like receptor
activation in older adults may increase the risk of infectious disease seen with 
aging.

© 2015 Associated Professional Sleep Societies, LLC.

PMCID: PMC4288601
PMID: 25325509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Sleep. 2015 Mar 1;38(3):463-71. doi: 10.5665/sleep.4510.

Increased inflammatory activity in nonobese patients with coronary artery disease
and obstructive sleep apnea.

Thunström E(1), Glantz H(1,)(2), Fu M(1), Yucel-Lindberg T(3), Petzold M(4),
Lindberg K(1,)(3), Peker Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, Institution of Medicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (2)Sleep
Medicine Unit, Skaraborg Hospital, Skövde, Sweden. (3)Division of Periodontology,
Department of Dental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden. (4)Centre
for Applied Biostatistics, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg, Sweden.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is common in patients with
coronary artery disease (CAD). Enhanced vascular inflammation is implicated as a 
pathophysiologic mechanism but obesity is confounding. We aimed to address the
association of OSA with inflammatory biomarkers in a nonobese cohort of
revascularized patients with CAD and preserved left ventricular ejection
fraction.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of baseline investigations of a randomized
controlled trial.
SETTING: Clinic-based.
PARTICIPANTS: There were 303 nonobese patients with CAD, of whom 213 with OSA
(apnea-hypopnea index [AHI] ≥15 events/h) and 90 without OSA (AHI < 5 events/h). 
Obese patients with CAD and OSA (N = 105) were chosen as an additional control
group.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS: Circulating levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP),
interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-α were assessed in relation
to OSA diagnosis based on AHI ≥ 15 events/h as well as oxygen desaturation index 
(ODI) ≥ 5 events/h.
RESULTS: Nonobese patients with OSA had significantly higher levels of hs-CRP and
IL-6 than those without OSA. The values did not differ significantly between
obese and nonobese patients with OSA. In bivariate regression analysis, AHI ≥ 15 
events/h was associated with all four biomarkers but not so in the multivariate
model after adjustment for confounders. ODI ≥ 5 events/h was associated with
hs-CRP (odds ratio [OR] 1.49, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.13-1.99) and IL-6
(OR 1.30; 95% CI 1.05-1.60) in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: OSA with ODI ≥ 5 was independently associated with increased
inflammatory activity in this nonobese CAD cohort. The intermittent hypoxemia,
rather than the number of apneas and hypopneas, appears to be primarily
associated with enhanced inflammation.

© 2015 Associated Professional Sleep Societies, LLC.

PMCID: PMC4335529
PMID: 25325463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Sleep Med. 2014 Dec;15(12):1571-8. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2014.07.013. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

Impaired sleep and allostatic load: cross-sectional results from the Danish
Copenhagen Aging and Midlife Biobank.

Clark AJ(1), Dich N(2), Lange T(3), Jennum P(4), Hansen AM(5), Lund R(6), Rod
NH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Social Medicine, Department of Public Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The Copenhagen Stress Research Center,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
alcl@sund.ku.dk. (2)Section of Social Medicine, Department of Public Health,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Section of Biostatistics,
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)The Danish Center for Sleep Medicine, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, 
Glostrup University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark; Center for Healthy Aging,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Section of Social Medicine,
Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The
Copenhagen Stress Research Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Section of Social Medicine, Department of Public Health, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Center for Healthy Aging, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Understanding the mechanisms linking sleep impairment to morbidity and
mortality is important for future prevention, but these mechanisms are far from
elucidated. We aimed to determine the relation between impaired sleep, both in
terms of duration and disturbed sleep, and allostatic load (AL), which is a
measure of systemic wear and tear of multiple body systems, as well as with
individual risk markers within the cardiac, metabolic, anthropometric, and immune
system.
METHODS: A cross-sectional population-based study of 5226 men and women from the 
Danish Copenhagen Aging and Midlife Biobank with comprehensive information on
sleep duration, disturbed sleep, objective measures of an extensive range of
biological risk markers, and physical conditions.
RESULTS: Long sleep (mean difference 0.23; 95% confidence interval, 0.13, 0.32)
and disturbed sleep (0.14; 0.06, 0.22) were associated with higher AL as well as 
with high-risk levels of risk markers from the anthropometric, metabolic, and
immune system. Sub-analyses suggested that the association between disturbed
sleep and AL might be explained by underlying disorders. Whereas there was no
association between short sleep and AL, the combination of short and disturbed
sleep was associated with higher AL (0.19; 0.08, 0.30) and high-risk levels of
immune system markers.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests small but significant differences in the
distribution of allostatic load, a pre-clinical indicator of disease risk and
premature death, for people with impaired relative to normal sleep. Impaired
sleep may be a risk factor for developing disease and be a risk marker for
underlying illness or sleep disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25316292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Sleep Med. 2014 Dec;15(12):1565-70. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2014.08.004. Epub 2014
Sep 10.

Sleep restoration is associated with reduced plasma C-reactive protein and
depression symptoms in military personnel with sleep disturbance after
deployment.

Heinzelmann M(1), Lee H(2), Rak H(1), Livingston W(1), Barr T(3), Baxter T(4),
Scattergood-Keepper L(1), Mysliwiec V(4), Gill J(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of Nursing Research, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)University of Nevada Las Vegas, 4505
Maryland Parkway, Box 453018, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA. Electronic address:
hyunhwa.lee@unlv.edu. (3)West Virginia University, 1 Medical Center Drive,
Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. (4)Madigan Army Medical Center, 9040A Fitzsimmons
Avenue, Tacoma, WA 98431, USA.

BACKGROUND: Deployed military personnel are vulnerable to chronic sleep
disturbance, which is highly comorbid with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) 
and depression, as well as declines in health-related quality of life (HRQOL).
Inflammation is associated with HRQOL declines and sleep-related comorbidities;
however, the impact of sleep changes on comorbid symptoms and inflammation in
this population is unknown.
METHODS: In this observational study, we examined the relationship between
reported sleep changes and concentrations of inflammatory biomarkers, interleukin
6 (IL-6), and C-reactive protein (CRP) in peripheral blood. The sample was
dichotomized into two groups: (1) decrease in Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
(PSQI; restorative sleep) and (2) no change or increase in PSQI (no change).
Mixed between-within subjects analysis of variance tests were used to determine
group differences on changes of inflammation and comorbid symptoms.
RESULTS: In our sample of 66 recently deployed military personnel with insomnia, 
34 participants reported restorative sleep whereas 32 reported no sleep changes. 
The two groups did not differ in demographic or clinical characteristics, with
the exception of PTSD diagnosis at baseline. The restorative sleep group had
significant reductions in CRP concentrations and depression symptoms, as well as 
reduced fatigue and improvements in emotional well-being, social functioning, and
physical functioning at follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Military personnel who report sleep restoration after deployment
have reduced CRP concentrations, decreased severity of depression, and improved
HRQOL. These findings suggest that treatment for sleep disturbances may be
associated with improvements in mental and physical health, thereby supporting
continued study in this line of research.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25311836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Psychiatr Res. 2015 Jan;60:95-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.09.018. Epub 
2014 Sep 26.

Sleep duration, insomnia, and markers of systemic inflammation: results from the 
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA).

Prather AA(1), Vogelzangs N(2), Penninx BW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, United
States. Electronic address: aric.prather@ucsf.edu. (2)Department of Psychiatry,
EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Systemic inflammation has emerged as a potential pathway linking depressive and
anxiety disorders with disease risk. Short and long sleep duration, as well as
insomnia, are common among psychiatric populations and have previously been
related to increased inflammation. The aim of the present study was to
investigate associations between sleep duration and insomnia with biomarkers of
inflammation and to explore whether these associations varied by psychiatric
diagnostic status. To this end, self-reported measures of sleep duration,
insomnia symptoms, and markers of inflammation, including C-reactive protein
(CRP), interleukin-(IL)-6, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, were obtained in
2553 adults (aged 18-65 years) diagnosed with current/recent or remitted
depressive and/or anxiety disorders and healthy controls enrolled in the
Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety (NESDA). Regression analyses revealed
associations between sleep duration and levels of CRP and IL-6 with higher levels
observed in long sleepers. These associations remained statistically significant 
after controlling for age, gender, education, body mass index, smoking, alcohol
consumption, medical comorbidities, medication use, psychotropic medication use, 
and psychiatric diagnostic status. There were no clear associations between
insomnia symptoms and levels of inflammation. Relationships between sleep
duration and inflammation did not vary as a function of psychiatric diagnostic
status. These findings suggest that elevated levels of systemic inflammation may 
represent a mechanism linking long sleep duration and disease risk among those
with and without depressive and anxiety disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4250403
PMID: 25307717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Dent Res. 2015 Mar;94(3 Suppl):28S-36S. doi: 10.1177/0022034514552493. Epub
2014 Oct 7.

Denture wearing during sleep doubles the risk of pneumonia in the very elderly.

Iinuma T(1), Arai Y(2), Abe Y(3), Takayama M(4), Fukumoto M(5), Fukui Y(5), Iwase
T(6), Takebayashi T(7), Hirose N(3), Gionhaku N(5), Komiyama K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Complete Denture Prosthodontics, Nihon University School of
Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan iinuma.toshimitsu@nihon-u.ac.jp yasumich@z6.keio.jp.
(2)Center for Supercentenarian Research, Keio University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan iinuma.toshimitsu@nihon-u.ac.jp yasumich@z6.keio.jp. (3)Center for
Supercentenarian Research, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Center for Preventive Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan. (5)Department of Complete Denture Prosthodontics, Nihon University School 
of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Nihon University School
of Dentistry, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Department of Preventive Medicine and Public
Health, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    J Dent Res. 2015 Mar;94(3 Suppl):14S-16S.

Poor oral health and hygiene are increasingly recognized as major risk factors
for pneumonia among the elderly. To identify modifiable oral health-related risk 
factors, we prospectively investigated associations between a constellation of
oral health behaviors and incident pneumonia in the community-living very elderly
(i.e., 85 years of age or older). At baseline, 524 randomly selected seniors (228
men and 296 women; mean age, 87.8 years) were examined for oral health status and
oral hygiene behaviors as well as medical assessment, including blood chemistry
analysis, and followed up annually until first hospitalization for or death from 
pneumonia. During a 3-year follow-up period, 48 events associated with pneumonia 
(20 deaths and 28 acute hospitalizations) were identified. Among 453 denture
wearers, 186 (40.8%) who wore their dentures during sleep were at higher risk for
pneumonia than those who removed their dentures at night (log rank P = 0.021). In
a multivariate Cox model, both perceived swallowing difficulties and overnight
denture wearing were independently associated with an approximately 2.3-fold
higher risk of the incidence of pneumonia (for perceived swallowing difficulties,
hazard ratio [HR], 2.31; and 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.11-4.82; and for
denture wearing during sleep, HR, 2.38; and 95% CI, 1.25-4.56), which was
comparable with the HR attributable to cognitive impairment (HR, 2.15; 95% CI,
1.06-4.34), history of stroke (HR, 2.46; 95% CI, 1.13-5.35), and respiratory
disease (HR, 2.25; 95% CI, 1.20-4.23). In addition, those who wore dentures
during sleep were more likely to have tongue and denture plaque, gum
inflammation, positive culture for Candida albicans, and higher levels of
circulating interleukin-6 as compared with their counterparts. This study
provided empirical evidence that denture wearing during sleep is associated not
only with oral inflammatory and microbial burden but also with incident
pneumonia, suggesting potential implications of oral hygiene programs for
pneumonia prevention in the community.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research.

PMCID: PMC4541085 [Available on 2016-03-01]
PMID: 25294364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Brain Behav Immun. 2014 Oct;41:191-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2014.05.016. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Greater inflammatory activity and blunted glucocorticoid signaling in monocytes
of chronically stressed caregivers.

Miller GE(1), Murphy ML(2), Cashman R(3), Ma R(3), Ma J(4), Arevalo JM(4), Kobor 
MS(5), Cole SW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern
University, United States. Electronic address: greg.miller@northwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology and Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern
University, United States. (3)British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver Centre,
Canada. (4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, UCLA School of Medicine, United
States; UCLA AIDS Institute, Molecular Biology Institute, Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, UCLA School of Medicine, United States; Norman Cousins Center at
UCLA, United States. (5)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and
Family Research Institute, British Columbia Children's Hospital, Canada; Human
Early Learning Partnership, School of Population and Public Health, University of
British Columbia, Canada.

Chronic stress is associated with morbidity and mortality from numerous
conditions, many of whose pathogenesis involves persistent inflammation. Here, we
examine how chronic stress influences signaling pathways that regulate
inflammation in monocytes. The sample consisted of 33 adults caring for a family 
member with glioblastoma and 47 controls whose lives were free of major
stressors. The subjects were assessed four times over eight months. Relative to
controls, caregivers' monocytes showed increased expression of genes bearing
response elements for nuclear-factor kappa B, a key pro-inflammatory
transcription factor. Simultaneously, caregivers showed reduced expression of
genes with response elements for the glucocorticoid receptor, a transcription
factor that conveys cortisol's anti-inflammatory signals to monocytes. Transcript
origin analyses revealed that CD14+/CD16- cells, a population of immature
monocytes, were the predominate source of inflammatory gene expression among
caregivers. We considered hormonal, molecular, and functional explanations for
caregivers' decreased glucocorticoid-mediated transcription. Across twelve days, 
the groups displayed similar diurnal cortisol profiles, suggesting that
differential adrenocortical activity was not involved. Moreover, the groups'
monocytes expressed similar amounts of glucocorticoid receptor protein,
suggesting that differential receptor availability was not involved. In ex vivo
studies, subjects' monocytes were stimulated with lipopolysaccharide, and
caregivers showed greater production of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6
relative to controls. However, no group differences in functional glucocorticoid 
sensitivity were apparent; hydrocortisone was equally effective at inhibiting
cytokine production in caregivers and controls. These findings may help shed
light on the mechanisms through which caregiving increases vulnerability to
inflammation-related diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25242587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Thorax. 2015 Feb;70(2):181-2. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205958. Epub 2014 Sep
2.

Markers of inflammation: data from the MOSAIC randomised trial of CPAP for
minimally symptomatic OSA.

Stradling JR(1), Craig SE(1), Kohler M(2), Nicoll D(1), Ayers L(3), Nunn AJ(4),
Bratton DJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
Churchill Hospital Campus, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, UK.
(2)Oxford Centre for Respiratory Medicine and Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
Churchill Hospital Campus, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, UK
Sleep Disorders Centre and Pulmonary Division, University Hospital of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Immunology, Churchill Hospital
Campus, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, UK. (4)MRC Clinical Trials
Unit at UCL, Aviation House, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Thorax. 2015 Apr;70(4):319.

The Multi-centre Obstructive Sleep Apnoea Interventional Cardiovascular (MOSAIC) 
trial compared 6 months of CPAP therapy, versus no CPAP, in 391 patients with
minimally symptomatic obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). We now report some
exploratory outcomes, markers of systemic inflammation (interleukin 6 (IL-6),
IL-10, C reactive protein, tumour necrosis factor). We found no consistent
changes (all p values >0.13).TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN 34164388.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25182045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Environ Res. 2014 Oct;134:228-32. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2014.07.026. Epub 2014
Aug 28.

Low-level mercury in children: associations with sleep duration and cytokines
TNF-α and IL-6.

Gump BB(1), Gabrikova E(2), Bendinskas K(3), Dumas AK(4), Palmer CD(5), Parsons
PJ(5), MacKenzie JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health, Food Studies, and Nutrition, Syracuse University,
United States. Electronic address: bbgump@syr.edu. (2)Departments of Biological
Sciences, State University of New York College at Oswego, United States.
(3)Departments of Chemistry, State University of New York College at Oswego,
United States. (4)Department of Public Health, Food Studies, and Nutrition,
Syracuse University, United States. (5)Laboratory of Inorganic and Nuclear
Chemistry, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, United States; 
Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of Public Health, The
University at Albany, United States.

There is a sizeable literature suggesting that mercury (Hg) exposure affects
cytokine levels in humans. In addition to their signaling role in the immune
system, some cytokines are also integrally associated with sleep behavior. In
this cross-sectional study of 9-11 year old children (N=100), we measured total
blood Hg in whole blood, serum levels of tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and
interleukin 6 (IL-6), and objectively measured sleep and activity using
actigraphy. Increasing blood Hg was associated with significantly shorter sleep
duration and lower levels of TNF-α. IL-6 was not associated with sleep or blood
Hg. This study is the first to document an association between total blood Hg and
sleep (albeit a small effect), and the first to consider the associations of
total blood Hg with cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 in a pediatric sample. Further
research using alternative designs (e.g., time-series) is necessary to determine 
if there is a causal pathway linking low-level Hg exposure to sleep restriction
and reduced cytokines.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4262607
PMID: 25173056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr;110(4):484-8. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2014.247. Epub 2014
Aug 26.

Sleep disorders and inflammatory disease activity: chicken or the egg?

Parekh PJ(1), Oldfield Iv EC(2), Challapallisri V(1), Ware JC(3), Johnson DA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department ofInternal Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk,
Virginia, USA. (2)Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.
(3)Department of Sleep Medicine, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk,
Virginia, USA. (4)Gastroenterology Division, Department of Internal Medicine,
Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.

Sleep dysfunction is a highly prevalent condition that has long been implicated
in accelerating disease states characterized by having an inflammatory component 
such as systemic lupus erythematosus, HIV, and multiple sclerosis. Inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic, debilitating disease that is characterized by
waxing and waning symptoms, which are a direct result of increased circulating
inflammatory cytokines. Recent studies have demonstrated sleep dysfunction and
the disruption of the circadian rhythm to result in an upregulation of
inflammatory cytokines. Not only does this pose a potential trigger for disease
flares but also an increased risk of malignancy in this subset of patients. This 
begs to question whether or not there is a therapeutic role of sleep cycle and
circadian rhythm optimization in the prevention of IBD flares. Further research
is needed to clarify the role of sleep dysfunction and alterations of the
circadian rhythm in modifying disease activity and also in reducing the risk of
malignancy in patients suffering from IBD.

PMID: 25155226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014 Oct 15;307(8):L643-51. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00373.2013. Epub 2014 Aug 22.

cAMP-dependent protein kinase activation decreases cytokine release in bronchial 
epithelial cells.

Wyatt TA(1), Poole JA(2), Nordgren TM(2), DeVasure JM(2), Heires AJ(2), Bailey
KL(3), Romberger DJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System Research Service, Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; Department of Environmental,
Agricultural, and Occupational Health, College of Public Health, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and
Allergy Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska twyatt@unmc.edu. (2)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy
Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (3)VA Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System Research Service,
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska; Department of
Environmental, Agricultural, and Occupational Health, College of Public Health,
University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska;

Lung injury caused by inhalation of dust from swine-concentrated animal-feeding
operations (CAFO) involves the release of inflammatory cytokine interleukin 8
(IL-8), which is mediated by protein kinase C-ε (PKC-ε) in airway epithelial
cells. Once activated by CAFO dust, PKC-ε is responsible for slowing cilia
beating and reducing cell migration for wound repair. Conversely, the
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) stimulates contrasting effects, such as
increased cilia beating and an acceleration of cell migration for wound repair.
We hypothesized that a bidirectional mechanism involving PKA and PKC regulates
epithelial airway inflammatory responses. To test this hypothesis, primary human 
bronchial epithelial cells and BEAS-2B cells were treated with hog dust extract
(HDE) in the presence or absence of cAMP. PKC-ε activity was significantly
reduced in cells that were pretreated for 1 h with 8-bromoadenosine 3',5'-cyclic 
monophosphate (8-Br-cAMP) before exposure to HDE (P < 0.05). HDE-induced IL-6,
and IL-8 release was significantly lower in cells that were pretreated with
8-Br-cAMP (P < 0.05). To exclude exchange protein activated by cAMP (EPAC)
involvement, cells were pretreated with either 8-Br-cAMP or
8-(4-chlorophenylthio)-2'-O-methyladenosine-3',5'-cyclic monophosphate
(8-CPT-2Me-cAMP) (EPAC agonist). 8-CPT-2Me-cAMP did not activate PKA and did not 
reduce HDE-stimulated IL-6 release. In contrast, 8-Br-cAMP decreased
HDE-stimulated tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α-converting enzyme (TACE; ADAM-17)
activity and subsequent TNF-α release (P < 0.001). 8-Br-cAMP also blocked
HDE-stimulated IL-6 and keratinocyte-derived chemokine release in precision-cut
mouse lung slices (P < 0.05). These data show bidirectional regulation of PKC-ε
via a PKA-mediated inhibition of TACE activity resulting in reduced
PKC-ε-mediated release of IL-6 and IL-8.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4200387
PMID: 25150062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Am J Hum Biol. 2015 Jan-Feb;27(1):133-5. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22608. Epub 2014 Aug
22.

Mood, behavior, testosterone, cortisol, and interleukin-6 in adults during immune
activation: a pilot study to assess sickness behaviors in humans.

Shattuck EC(1), Muehlenbein MP.

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Physiology and Ecology Laboratory, Department of Anthropology,
Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana.

OBJECTIVES: Sickness behavior, a suite of behavioral changes subsequent to
infection that includes depression, decreased social behaviors, and sleep
disturbances, has been well described in model organisms. The phenomenon is
relatively unexplored in humans due to methodological difficulties, and hormonal 
correlates of sickness behavior have not been studied. We therefore attempted to 
use a vaccine to elicit sickness behaviors outside of a clinical setting and
uncover any correlations among testosterone, cortisol, and sickness behavior.
METHODS: Eleven participants (five male, six female, mean age 22.8 years) naïve
to the rabies vaccine were recruited from the School of Veterinary Medicine at
Purdue University. Participants provided daily saliva and urine samples and
completed questionnaires to assess mood and social behaviors for a period of 6
weeks. Saliva samples were assayed for cortisol and testosterone. Urine samples
were assayed for interleukin-6 and creatinine.
RESULTS: Analysis revealed an expected decrease in testosterone and an increase
in cortisol. While mood did not differ, other behaviors, such as physical
activity and hours slept, showed expected changes following vaccination. However,
none of these results achieved statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: Our results, while generally confirming previous research on sickness
behavior and hormone changes during infection, are suggestive, but not
statistically significant and so neither confirm nor contradict our hypotheses.
We attribute this lack of significance to both the small sample size, as well as 
possible confounding factors, including the psychosocial stress of entering an
intensive study program.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25145791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Trials. 2014 Aug 18;15:327. doi: 10.1186/1745-6215-15-327.

Impact of oral melatonin on critically ill adult patients with ICU sleep
deprivation: study protocol for a randomized controlled trial.

Huang H, Jiang L, Shen L, Zhang G, Zhu B, Cheng J, Xi X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Fuxing Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 20A Fu Xing Men Wai Da Jie, Xicheng District, Beijing 100038, China. 
xxm_fxyy@sina.cn.

BACKGROUND: Sleep deprivation is common in critically ill patients in intensive
care units (ICU). It can result in delirium, difficulty weaning, repeated
nosocomial infections, prolonged ICU length of stay and increased ICU mortality. 
Melatonin, a physiological sleep regulator, is well known to benefit sleep
quality in certain people, but evidence for the effectiveness in ICU sleep
disturbance is limited.
METHODS/DESIGN: This study has a prospective, randomized, double-blind,
controlled, parallel-group design. Eligible patients are randomly assigned to one
of the two treatment study groups, labelled the 'melatonin group' or the 'placebo
group'. A dose of 3 mg of oral melatonin or placebo is administered at 9:00 pm on
four consecutive days. Earplugs and eye masks are made available to every
participant. We plan to enrol 198 patients. The primary outcome is the objective 
sleep quality measured by the 24-hour polysomnography. The secondary outcomes are
the subjective sleep quality assessed by the Richards Campbell Sleep
Questionnaire, the anxiety level evaluated by the Visual Analogue Scale-Anxiety, 
the number of delirium-free days in 8 and 28 days, the number of ventilation-free
days in 28 days, the number of antibiotic-free days, ICU length of stay, the
overall ICU mortality in 28 days and the incidence and severity of the side
effects of melatonin in ICU patients. Additionally, the body stress levels,
oxidative stress levels and inflammation levels are obtained via measuring the
plasma melatonin, cortisone, norepinephrine, malonaldehyde(MDA), superoxide
dismutase(SOD), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-8 (IL-8)concentrations.
DISCUSSION: The proposed study will be the first randomized controlled study to
use the polysomnography, which is the gold standard of assessing sleep quality,
to evaluate the effect of melatonin on the sleep quality and circadian rhythms of
ICU patients. The results may recommend a new treatment for ICU patients with
sleep deprivation that is safe, effective and easily implementable in daily
practice.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This study was registered with ClinicalTrials (NCT;
registration number: ChiCTR-TRC-14004319) on 4 March 2013.

PMCID: PMC4158051
PMID: 25135124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Chron Obstruct Pulmon Dis. 2014 Aug 5;9:759-73. doi: 10.2147/COPD.S61347.
eCollection 2014.

Serum cytokine profiling and enrichment analysis reveal the involvement of
immunological and inflammatory pathways in stable patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Bade G(1), Khan MA(2), Srivastava AK(1), Khare P(1), Solaiappan KK(1), Guleria
R(3), Palaniyar N(2), Talwar A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, 
India. (2)Program in Physiology and Experimental Medicine, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, and Institute of
Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (3)Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Sleep Disorders, All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a major global health problem. It
results from chronic inflammation and causes irreversible airway damage. Levels
of different serum cytokines could be surrogate biomarkers for inflammation and
lung function in COPD. We aimed to determine the serum levels of different
biomarkers in COPD patients, the association between cytokine levels and various 
prognostic parameters, and the key pathways/networks involved in stable COPD. In 
this study, serum levels of 48 cytokines were examined by multiplex assays in 30 
subjects (control, n=9; COPD, n=21). Relationships between serum biomarkers and
forced expiratory volume in 1 second, peak oxygen uptake, body mass index,
dyspnea score, and smoking were assessed. Enrichment pathways and network
analyses were implemented, using a list of cytokines showing differential
expression between healthy controls and patients with COPD by Cytoscape and
GeneGo Metacore™ software (Thomson-Reuters Corporation, New York, NY, USA).
Concentrations of cutaneous T-cell attracting chemokine, eotaxin, hepatocyte
growth factor, interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-16, and stem cell factor are
significantly higher in COPD patients compared with in control patients. Notably,
this study identifies stem cell factor as a biomarker for COPD. Multiple
regression analysis predicts that cutaneous T-cell-attracting chemokine, eotaxin,
IL-6, and stem cell factor are inversely associated with forced expiratory volume
in 1 second and peak oxygen uptake change, whereas smoking is related to eotaxin 
and hepatocyte growth factor changes. Enrichment pathways and network analyses
reveal the potential involvement of specific inflammatory and immune process
pathways in COPD. Identified network interaction and regulation of different
cytokines would pave the way for deeper insight into mechanisms of the disease
process.

PMCID: PMC4130715
PMID: 25125975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Otolaryngol. 2014 Oct;39(5):266-71. doi: 10.1111/coa.12289.

Effects of adenoid/tonsillectomy on inflammatory response in snoring children
with witnessed apnoea.

Mutlu M(1), Vuralkan E, Yardim Akaydin S, Akin I, Miser E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Diskapi Yildirim Beyazit Training and
Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the clinical significance of 
preoperative serum C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), fetuin-A,
cystatin C, adiponectin and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) levels in
children with adenoid/tonsillar hypertrophy and compare these results with
postoperative values.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective clinical trial.
SETTING: Single tertiary care centre.
PARTICIPANTS: Thirty-five children (14 boys and 21 girls) participated in this
study.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The operations were performed with the indication of
sleep-disordered breathing (SDB). Blood samples were taken preoperatively and at 
6 months postoperatively to determine the changes in serum high-sensitivity CRP
(hs-CRP), IL-6, fetuin-A, cystatin C, adiponectin and TNF-α levels. Pre- and
postoperative values of body weights and heights of the participants were
recorded preoperatively and at postoperative 6 months.
RESULTS: Patients underwent adenoidectomy (n = 21) or adenotonsillectomy
(n = 21). The mean age at surgery was 8.74 ± 3.33 years (range 3-16 years). Mean 
serum levels of parameters measured preoperatively and at postoperative 6 months.
The observed differences between pre- and postoperative values were statistically
significant (P < 0.05), excluding cystatin C levels (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: High levels of IL-6, hs-CRP and TNF-α and low levels of fetuin-A in
serum might have a clinical significance in patients with sleep-disordered
breathing. Levels of cytokines in children with sleep-disordered breathing
because of adenotonsillar disease decreased after surgical treatment. The risks
of development of cardiovascular disease are decreased in association with lower 
levels of cytokines, which are also closely associated with many disease states.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25099745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Psychosom Res. 2014 Aug;77(2):155-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2014.06.002.
Epub 2014 Jun 13.

Attachment anxiety predicts IL-6 and length of hospital stay in coronary artery
bypass graft surgery (CABG) patients.

Kidd T(1), Poole L(2), Leigh E(2), Ronaldson A(2), Jahangiri M(3), Steptoe A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, 1-19 
Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
T.Kidd@ucl.ac.uk. (2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University
College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Cardiac Surgery, St. George's Hospital, University of London,
Blackshaw Road, London SW17 0QT, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: The mechanisms underlying the association between adult attachment and
health are not well understood. In the current study, we investigated the
relationship between attachment anxiety, attachment avoidance, inflammation, and 
length of hospital stay in coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery patients.
METHOD: 167 CABG patients completed an attachment questionnaire prior to surgery,
and blood samples were taken before and after surgery to assess inflammatory
activity.
RESULTS: We found that attachment anxiety predicted higher plasma interleukin 6
(IL-6) concentration, and this association was mediated by self-reported sleep
quality. Anxious attachment also predicted longer hospital stays following CABG
surgery, even after controlling for demographic and clinical factors.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that increased levels of IL-6 may be a process
linking adult attachment anxiety with health outcomes.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4121675
PMID: 25077858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. BMJ. 2014 Jul 10;349:g4164. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g4164.

Association between alcohol and cardiovascular disease: Mendelian randomisation
analysis based on individual participant data.

Holmes MV, Dale CE, Zuccolo L, Silverwood RJ, Guo Y, Ye Z, Prieto-Merino D,
Dehghan A, Trompet S, Wong A, Cavadino A, Drogan D, Padmanabhan S, Li S,
Yesupriya A, Leusink M, Sundstrom J, Hubacek JA, Pikhart H, Swerdlow DI,
Panayiotou AG, Borinskaya SA, Finan C, Shah S, Kuchenbaecker KB, Shah T, Engmann 
J, Folkersen L, Eriksson P, Ricceri F, Melander O, Sacerdote C, Gamble DM,
Rayaprolu S, Ross OA, McLachlan S, Vikhireva O, Sluijs I, Scott RA, Adamkova V,
Flicker L, Bockxmeer FM, Power C, Marques-Vidal P, Meade T, Marmot MG, Ferro JM, 
Paulos-Pinheiro S, Humphries SE, Talmud PJ, Mateo Leach I, Verweij N, Linneberg
A, Skaaby T, Doevendans PA, Cramer MJ, van der Harst P, Klungel OH, Dowling NF,
Dominiczak AF, Kumari M, Nicolaides AN, Weikert C, Boeing H, Ebrahim S, Gaunt TR,
Price JF, Lannfelt L, Peasey A, Kubinova R, Pajak A, Malyutina S, Voevoda MI,
Tamosiunas A, Maitland-van der Zee AH, Norman PE, Hankey GJ, Bergmann MM, Hofman 
A, Franco OH, Cooper J, Palmen J, Spiering W, de Jong PA, Kuh D, Hardy R,
Uitterlinden AG, Ikram MA, Ford I, Hyppönen E, Almeida OP, Wareham NJ, Khaw KT,
Hamsten A, Husemoen LL, Tjønneland A, Tolstrup JS, Rimm E, Beulens JW, Verschuren
WM, Onland-Moret NC, Hofker MH, Wannamethee SG, Whincup PH, Morris R, Vicente AM,
Watkins H, Farrall M, Jukema JW, Meschia J, Cupples LA, Sharp SJ, Fornage M,
Kooperberg C, LaCroix AZ, Dai JY, Lanktree MB, Siscovick DS, Jorgenson E, Spring 
B, Coresh J, Li YR, Buxbaum SG, Schreiner PJ, Ellison RC, Tsai MY, Patel SR,
Redline S, Johnson AD, Hoogeveen RC, Hakonarson H, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, de
Bakker PI, Kivimaki M, Asselbergs FW, Sattar N, Lawlor DA, Whittaker J, Davey
Smith G, Mukamal K, Psaty BM, Wilson JG, Lange LA, Hamidovic A, Hingorani AD,
Nordestgaard BG, Bobak M, Leon DA, Langenberg C, Palmer TM, Reiner AP, Keating
BJ, Dudbridge F, Casas JP; InterAct Consortium.

Comment in
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2014 Oct 23;156(18):32.
    Evid Based Med. 2015 Feb;20(1):38.
    BMJ. 2014;349:g4334.
    Nat Rev Cardiol. 2014 Sep;11(9):495.

OBJECTIVE: To use the rs1229984 variant in the alcohol dehydrogenase 1B gene
(ADH1B) as an instrument to investigate the causal role of alcohol in
cardiovascular disease.
DESIGN: Mendelian randomisation meta-analysis of 56 epidemiological studies.
PARTICIPANTS: 261 991 individuals of European descent, including 20 259 coronary 
heart disease cases and 10 164 stroke events. Data were available on ADH1B
rs1229984 variant, alcohol phenotypes, and cardiovascular biomarkers.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Odds ratio for coronary heart disease and stroke
associated with the ADH1B variant in all individuals and by categories of alcohol
consumption.
RESULTS: Carriers of the A-allele of ADH1B rs1229984 consumed 17.2% fewer units
of alcohol per week (95% confidence interval 15.6% to 18.9%), had a lower
prevalence of binge drinking (odds ratio 0.78 (95% CI 0.73 to 0.84)), and had
higher abstention (odds ratio 1.27 (1.21 to 1.34)) than non-carriers. Rs1229984
A-allele carriers had lower systolic blood pressure (-0.88 (-1.19 to -0.56) mm
Hg), interleukin-6 levels (-5.2% (-7.8 to -2.4%)), waist circumference (-0.3
(-0.6 to -0.1) cm), and body mass index (-0.17 (-0.24 to -0.10) kg/m(2)).
Rs1229984 A-allele carriers had lower odds of coronary heart disease (odds ratio 
0.90 (0.84 to 0.96)). The protective association of the ADH1B rs1229984 A-allele 
variant remained the same across all categories of alcohol consumption (P=0.83
for heterogeneity). Although no association of rs1229984 was identified with the 
combined subtypes of stroke, carriers of the A-allele had lower odds of ischaemic
stroke (odds ratio 0.83 (0.72 to 0.95)).
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with a genetic variant associated with non-drinking and 
lower alcohol consumption had a more favourable cardiovascular profile and a
reduced risk of coronary heart disease than those without the genetic variant.
This suggests that reduction of alcohol consumption, even for light to moderate
drinkers, is beneficial for cardiovascular health.

© Holmes et al 2014.

PMCID: PMC4091648
PMID: 25011450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Hum Immunol. 2014 Aug;75(8):940-4. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2014.06.023. Epub 2014
Jun 30.

Increased plasma IL-6, IL-8, TNF-alpha, and G-CSF in Japanese narcolepsy.

Tanaka S(1), Honda M(2), Toyoda H(2), Kodama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science,
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Kamikitazawa 2-1-6, Setagaya-ku,
Tokyo 156-8506, Japan. Electronic address: tanaka-ss@igakuken.or.jp. (2)Sleep
Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Tokyo
Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Kamikitazawa 2-1-6, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo
156-8506, Japan.

Narcolepsy is a chronic hypersomnia involving excessive daytime sleepiness and
cataplexy. Some susceptibility genes and environmental factors suggest that
post-infectious immunological alterations underlie its pathophysiology. To
investigate the immunological alterations in narcolepsy patients, we examined
cytokines. Nine healthy controls and twenty-one narcolepsy patients with
cataplexy were studied. All subjects were positive for the
HLA-DRB1(∗)1501-DQB1(∗)0602 allele. Age-, sex-, and body mass index -matched
healthy controls were selected. Plasma samples were separated using
EDTA-2K-coated blood collection tubes. Bioplex Pro Human Cytokine 17-Plex Assays 
were used to measure plasma cytokines. Elevations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8,
granulocyte- colony stimulating factor (G-CSF), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
were found in the narcolepsy group compared with healthy controls (p<0.05). G-CSF
values were significantly correlated with the disease duration in narcolepsy
patients (r=0.426, p<0.05). IL-8 and G-CSF play major roles in neutrophil
activation in respiratory diseases. Since environmental factors including
infection are reportedly associated with narcolepsy onset, elevated IL-8 and
G-CSF may be involved in the pathophysiology of narcolepsy.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24994458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:605280. doi: 10.1155/2014/605280. Epub 2014 Jun 1.

Inflammatory markers and obstructive sleep apnea in obese children: the NANOS
study.

Gileles-Hillel A(1), Alonso-Álvarez ML(2), Kheirandish-Gozal L(1), Peris E(1),
Cordero-Guevara JA(2), Terán-Santos J(2), Martinez MG(3), Jurado-Luque MJ(4),
Corral-Peñafiel J(5), Duran-Cantolla J(6), Gozal D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Sleep Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Comer Children's
Hospital, Pritzker School of Medicine, Biological Sciences Division, The
University of Chicago, 5721 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Sleep 
Unit, Instituto Carlos III.CIBERES, Spain ; CIBER of Respiratory Diseases,
Instituto Carlos III.CIBERES, Spain ; Hospital Universitario de Burgos (HUBU),
Burgos, Spain. (3)Sleep Unit, Instituto Carlos III.CIBERES, Spain ; Hospital
Universitario Valdecilla, Santander, Spain. (4)Sleep Unit, Instituto Carlos
III.CIBERES, Spain ; CIBER of Respiratory Diseases, Instituto Carlos III.CIBERES,
Spain ; Hospital Val d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Sleep Unit, Instituto Carlos 
III.CIBERES, Spain ; CIBER of Respiratory Diseases, Instituto Carlos III.CIBERES,
Spain ; Hospital San Pedro de Alcantara, Caceres, Spain. (6)Sleep Unit, Instituto
Carlos III.CIBERES, Spain ; CIBER of Respiratory Diseases, Instituto Carlos
III.CIBERES, Spain ; Servicio de Investigación, Hospital Universitario Araba
(BioAraba), Universidad del País Vasco (UPV/EHU), Vitoria, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Obesity and obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSA) are common
coexisting conditions associated with a chronic low-grade inflammatory state
underlying some of the cognitive, metabolic, and cardiovascular morbidities.
AIM: To examine the levels of inflammatory markers in obese community-dwelling
children with OSA, as compared to no-OSA, and their association with clinical and
polysomnographic (PSG) variables. Methods. In this cross-sectional, prospective
multicenter study, healthy obese Spanish children (ages 4-15 years) were randomly
selected and underwent nocturnal PSG followed by a morning fasting blood draw.
Plasma samples were assayed for multiple inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: 204 children were enrolled in the study; 75 had OSA, defined by an
obstructive respiratory disturbance index (RDI) of 3 events/hour total sleep time
(TST). BMI, gender, and age were similar in OSA and no-OSA children. Monocyte
chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1)
levels were significantly higher in OSA children, with interleukin-6
concentrations being higher in moderate-severe OSA (i.e., AHI > 5/hrTST; P <
0.01), while MCP-1 levels were associated with more prolonged nocturnal
hypercapnia (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: IL-6, MCP-1, and PAI-1 are altered in the context of OSA among
community-based obese children further reinforcing the proinflammatory effects of
sleep disorders such as OSA. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov
NCT01322763.

PMCID: PMC4058796
PMID: 24991089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:568951. doi: 10.1155/2014/568951. Epub 2014 May 19.

Abnormal cytokine profile in patients with obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea
syndrome and erectile dysfunction.

Bouloukaki I(1), Papadimitriou V(2), Sofras F(2), Mermigkis C(1), Moniaki V(1),
Siafakas NM(1), Schiza SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Thoracic Medicine, University of Crete, 
711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece. (2)Department of Urology, University of Crete,
711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Patients with obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) show a high
prevalence of erectile dysfunction (ED). Although the underlying pathogenesis is 
still unknown, endothelial dysfunction, induced by inflammatory cytokines,
chemokines, and adhesion molecules, has been proposed as a possible mechanism.
The aim of this study was to assess whether OSAHS is associated with activation
of the inflammatory cytokine system in patients with ED compared to the matched
OSAHS patients with normal sexual function. Thirty-one patients with severe OSAHS
and ED were included. Fifteen patients with severe OSAHS and without ED served as
controls. Serum concentrations of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP),
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-a), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), and 
adiponectin were measured after the diagnostic polysomnography. We found that
hsCRP levels were significantly elevated in OSAHS patients with ED compared to
controls. Similarly, TNF-a levels, IL-6, and IL-8 were elevated in OSAHS patients
with ED compared to controls. Serum adiponectin levels were lower in OSAHS-ED
patients, but the difference did not reach statistical significance. The presence
of ED in patients with severe OSAHS is associated with elevated levels of
inflammatory markers, underlining a possible involvement of endothelial
dysfunction in the pathogenesis of ED.

PMCID: PMC4055285
PMID: 24966468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Int J Obes (Lond). 2015 Feb;39(2):260-4. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2014.106. Epub 2014 Jun
20.

Omentin-1 levels are reduced by pharmacologic doses of leptin, but remain
unaffected by energy deprivation and display no day-night variation.

Hamnvik OP(1), Thakkar B(2), Chamberland J(3), Aronis K(4), Schneider B(5),
Mantzoros CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2] Section of Endocrinology,
Veteran's Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA,
USA. (2)1] Section of Endocrinology, Veteran's Affairs Boston Healthcare System, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2] Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes
and Nutrition, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA [3] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)1]
Section of Endocrinology, Veteran's Affairs Boston Healthcare System, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [2] Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and
Metabolism, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department 
of Surgery, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To study the day-night variation of omentin-1 levels and assess
whether leptin and/or short- and long-term energy deprivation alter circulating
omentin-1 levels via cytokines.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Omentin-1 levels were measured hourly in serum samples from
six healthy men to evaluate for day-night variation. To study effects of acute
energy deprivation and of leptin administration, eight healthy subjects were
studied in the fasting state for 72 h with administration of either placebo or
metreleptin (recombinant human leptin) in physiologic replacement doses. We
evaluated the effect of leptin in pharmacologic doses on serum omentin-1 and
cytokine levels, as well as on omentin-1 levels in ex vivo omental adipose
tissue, in 15 healthy volunteers. To study the effect of chronic energy
deprivation and weight loss on omentin-1 levels, we followed 18 obese subjects
for 12 months who underwent bariatric surgery.
RESULTS: There is no day-night variation in omentin-1 levels. Short-term and
chronic energy deprivation, as well as ex vivo leptin administration and
physiologic replacement doses of leptin, do not alter omentin-1 levels;
pharmacologic doses of metreleptin reduce omentin-1 levels, whereas levels of
tumor necrosis factor-α receptor II and interleukin-6 tend to increase.
CONCLUSIONS: Omentin-1 levels are reduced by pharmacologic doses of metreleptin
independent of effects on cytokine levels.

PMCID: PMC4272682
PMID: 24946907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Arch Bronconeumol. 2014 Oct;50(10):422-8. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2014.02.016. Epub
2014 Jun 8.

Effect of continuous positive airway pressure and upper airway surgery on exhaled
breath condensate and serum biomarkers in patients with sleep apnea.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Lloberes P(1), Sánchez-Vidaurre S(2), Ferré À(3), Cruz MJ(2), Lorente J(4),
Sampol G(5), Morell F(6), Muñoz X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Unidad del Sueño, Hospital Universitari
Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto
de Salud Calos III, Madrid, España. Electronic address: plloberes@vhebron.net.
(2)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud Calos III,
Madrid, España. (3)Unidad del Sueño, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto de Salud
Calos III, Madrid, España. (4)Servei de Otorrinolaringologia, Hospital
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España;
Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España.
(5)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Unidad del Sueño, Hospital Universitari
Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto
de Salud Calos III, Madrid, España; Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. (6)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari 
Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto
de Salud Calos III, Madrid, España; Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma
de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. (7)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Universitari 
Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Instituto
de Salud Calos III, Madrid, España; Departament de Biologia Cel·lular, Fisiologia
e Immunologia, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España.

INTRODUCTION: Studies on inflammation biomarkers in serum and in exhaled breath
condensate (EBC) in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) have shown conflicting results.
The objective of this study is to assess EBC and serum biomarkers in OSA patients
at baseline and after continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) or upper airway 
surgery (UAS).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Nine OSA patients referred for UAS were matched for
anthropometric characteristics and apnea-hypopnea index with 20 patients
receiving CPAP. pH, nitrite (NO2(-)), nitrate and interleukin 6 in EBC and
NO2(-), nitrate, leukotriene B4 and interleukin 6 in serum were determined. EBC
and serum samples were collected at baseline and 3 months after CPAP or UAS.
RESULTS: Patients' mean body mass index was 30 (range 24.9-40) kg/m(2). EBC
biomarker levels at baseline were within normal range and did not differ
significantly after CPAP or UAS. No significant changes were observed in the
serum concentration of the biomarkers determined after CPAP but the serum
concentration of NO2(-) increased significantly at 3 months after UAS (P=.0078).
CONCLUSION: In mildly obese OSA patients, EBC biomarkers of inflammation or
oxidative stress were normal at baseline and remained unchanged 3 months after
UAS or CPAP. Although UAS was not effective in terms of reducing OSA severity, it
was associated with an increase in serum NO2(-).

Copyright © 2013 SEPAR. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24915890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pain. 2014 Sep;155(9):1755-61. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.05.029. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Inflammation and inflammatory control in interstitial cystitis/bladder pain
syndrome: Associations with painful symptoms.

Schrepf A(1), O'Donnell M(2), Luo Y(2), Bradley CS(3), Kreder K(3), Lutgendorf
S(4); Multidisciplinary Approach to the Study of Chronic Pelvic Pain (MAPP)
Research Network.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Iowa, Ames, IA, USA. (3)Department of
Urology, University of Iowa, Ames, IA, USA; Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)Department of Psychology, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Urology, University of
Iowa, Ames, IA, USA; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA. Electronic address: Susan-lutgendorf@uiowa.edu.

Toll-like receptors (TLR) are known to play a role in chronic pain, from animal
models and limited research in humans, but their role in interstitial
cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS) is unknown. Similarly, alterations of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis have been reported in some pain conditions.
Our objectives were to identify inflammatory processes that might distinguish
individuals with IC/BPS from healthy controls (HC) and to examine their
associations with IC/BPS symptoms. Female participants (58IC/BPS patients and
28HCs) completed pain and urinary symptom questionnaires and collected saliva for
cortisol as part of the Multidisciplinary Approach to Pelvic Pain study.
Inflammatory cytokines were assayed in plasma, and in TLR-2- and TLR-4-stimulated
peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Controlling for BMI and negative affect,
between-group differences were analyzed by general linear models, and
relationships between symptoms and inflammatory variables were analyzed by
regression. Compared to HCs, IC/BPS patients had higher levels of plasma
interleukin-6 (P=.040), greater interleukin-1β responsive to TLR-2 stimulation
(P=.040), and flatter diurnal cortisol slopes (P=.010), indicating inflammatory
dysregulation. In IC/BPS patients, inflammation after TLR-4 stimulation was
associated with multiple symptoms, including genitourinary pain (P=.010), sexual 
pain (P=.002), and marginally with urinary symptoms (P=.068). Genitourinary pain 
severity (P=.008), frequency (P=.001), and pain with intercourse (P=.002) were
strongly associated with TLR-4 inflammatory response. TLR-4 appears to play a
central role in painful symptoms of IC/BPS patients, which may be linked to poor 
endogenous inflammatory control. These findings may help to identify new
mechanisms in IC/BPS and lead to new therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2014 International Association for the Study of Pain. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4166494
PMID: 24907404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014 Aug;46:141-52. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.04.020. Epub 2014 May 2.

Association of pro-inflammatory cytokines, cortisol and depression in patients
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Du YJ(1), Yang CJ(2), Li B(1), Wu X(1), Lv YB(1), Jin HL(1), Cao YX(1), Sun J(1),
Luo QL(1), Gong WY(1), Zhang HY(1), Liu BJ(1), Wu JF(1), Dong JC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Integrative Medicine for Lung, Inflammation and Cancers, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (2)Lab of Integrative Medicine for
Lung, Inflammation and Cancers, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China; School of Preschool & Special Education, East China Normal University,
Shanghai, China. (3)Lab of Integrative Medicine for Lung, Inflammation and
Cancers, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
jcdong2004@126.com.

Evidence suggests that pro-inflammatory cytokines and cortisol play a crucial
role in the etiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and
depression. Depression occurs commonly among COPD patients and an earlier
diagnosis would be beneficial. This study investigated the associations between
depression, sputum cytokines and salivary cortisol in COPD patients. The diurnal 
rhythms of sputum IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α and salivary cortisol were measured in COPD
patients with depression compared to those only with depression, or COPD and
healthy controls. The area under the diurnal variation curves (AUC) over the 24h 
time course and relative diurnal variation (VAR) were calculated while
correlation and regression analysis were performed. Patients with co-morbid
depression and COPD showed an increasing sputum IL-1, sputum TNF-α AUC and a
decreasing salivary cortisol VAR (P<0.001). The combination of sputum TNF-α AUC, 
sputum IL-1 AUC, sputum IL-6 AUC and salivary cortisol VAR performed best as a
potential biomarker in the diagnosis of depression in COPD patients, with a
sensitivity of 94.74% and a specificity of 96.67%. Positive correlations were
found between sputum IL-1 AUC and sputum TNF-α AUC versus depressive symptoms,
respectively a negative correlation was found between salivary cortisol VAR and
depression. They were independently associated with depression in logistic
regression models. Depression in COPD is associated with higher 24-h overall
levels of sputum IL-1, TNF-α and flattened diurnal salivary cortisol. These
non-invasive sputum and salivary biomarkers may serve as a simple clinical tool
for the early diagnosis of depression in COPD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24882166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Chronobiol Int. 2014 Oct;31(8):878-90. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2014.921790. Epub
2014 May 27.

Period3 VNTR polymorphism influences the time-of-day pain onset of acute
myocardial infarction with ST elevation.

Lipkova J(1), Splichal Z, Bienertova-Vasku JA, Jurajda M, Parenica J, Vasku A,
Goldbergova MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University 
, Czech Republic .

It is well established that the incidence and infarct size in acute myocardial
infarction (AMI) is subject to circadian variations. At the molecular level,
circadian clocks in distinct cells, including cardiomyocytes, generate 24-h
cycles of biochemical processes. Possible imbalance or impairment in the cell
clock mechanism may alter the cardiac metabolism and function and increase the
susceptibility of cardiovascular diseases. One of the key components of the human
clock system PERIOD3 (PER3) has been recently demonstrated to affect circadian
expression of various genes in different tissues, including the heart. The
variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism (rs57875989) in gene Period3
(Per3) is related to multiple phenotypic parameters, including diurnal
preference, sleep homeostasis, infection and cancer. The aim of our study was to 
investigate the effect of this polymorphism in AMI with ST elevation (STEMI). The
study subjects (314 patients of Caucasian origin with STEMI, and 332 healthy
controls) were genotyped for Per3 VNTR polymorphism using an allele-specific
polymerase chain reaction. A gender difference in circadian rhythmicity of pain
onset was observed with significant circadian pattern in men. Furthermore, the
Per3(5/5) variant carriers were associated with higher levels of interleukin-6,
B-type natriuretic peptide and lower vitamin A levels. By using cosinor analysis 
we observed different circadian distribution patterns of AMI onset at the level
of genotype and allelic frequencies. Genotypes with at least one 4-repeat allele 
(Per3(4/5) and Per3(4/4)) (N = 264) showed remarkable circadian activity in
comparison with Per3(5/5) (N = 50), especially in men. No significant differences
in genotype and/or allele frequencies of Per3 VNTR polymorphism were observed
when comparing STEMI cases and controls. Our results indicate that the Per3 VNTR 
may contribute to modulation of cardiac functions and interindividual differences
in development and progression of myocardial infarction.

PMID: 24866331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Psychosom Med. 2014 Jun;76(5):363-9. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000063.

Depressive symptom clusters as predictors of 6-year increases in insulin
resistance: data from the Pittsburgh Healthy Heart Project.

Khambaty T(1), Stewart JC, Muldoon MF, Kamarck TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology (T.K., J.C.S.), Indiana University-Purdue University 
Indianapolis (IUPUI), Indianapolis, Indiana; Heart & Vascular Institute (M.F.M), 
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and
Department of Psychology (T.W.K.), University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.

OBJECTIVE: To examine longitudinal bidirectional associations between two
depressive symptom clusters-the cognitive-affective and somatic-vegetative
clusters--and insulin resistance, a marker of prediabetes.
METHODS: Participants were 269 adults aged 50 to 70 years without diabetes
enrolled in the Pittsburgh Healthy Heart Project, a prospective cohort study. At 
baseline and 6-year visits, participants completed the Beck Depression
Inventory-II (BDI-II) and underwent a blood draw to quantify fasting insulin and 
glucose. We examined baseline BDI-II total, cognitive-affective, and
somatic-vegetative scores as predictors of 6-year change in the homeostatic model
of assessment (HOMA) score, an estimate of insulin resistance computed from
fasting insulin and glucose. We also examined baseline HOMA score as a predictor 
of 6-year change in BDI-II total and subscale scores.
RESULTS: Regression analyses, adjusted for demographic factors and baseline HOMA 
score, revealed that the baseline BDI-II somatic-vegetative score (β = 0.14, p = 
.025), but not the cognitive-affective (β = 0.001, p = .98) or total (β = 0.10, p
= .11) scores, predicted 6-year HOMA change. This result persisted in models
controlling for anxiety symptoms and hostility. Several factors were examined as 
candidate mediators; however, only change in body mass index was a significant
mediator (p = .042), accounting for 23% of the observed association. Baseline
HOMA score did not predict 6-year change in BDI-II total or subscale scores (all 
p values >.56).
CONCLUSIONS: Among adults aged 50 to 70 years, the somatic-vegetative symptoms of
depression (e.g., fatigue, sleep disturbance, and appetite changes) may worsen
insulin resistance and increase diabetes risk, partly, by increasing body mass
index.

PMCID: PMC4065635
PMID: 24846000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014 Jun;44:71-82. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.02.020.
Epub 2014 Mar 6.

Circadian rhythmicity, variability and correlation of interleukin-6 levels in
plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of healthy men.

Agorastos A(1), Hauger RL(2), Barkauskas DA(3), Moeller-Bertram T(2), Clopton
PL(4), Haji U(4), Lohr JB(2), Geracioti TD Jr(5), Patel PM(6), Chrousos GP(7),
Baker DG(8).

Author information: 
(1)VA Center of Excellence for Stress and Mental Health, San Diego, CA, USA;
Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (2)VA Center of Excellence for Stress and
Mental Health, San Diego, CA, USA; VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA,
USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (4)VA San Diego Healthcare System, San
Diego, CA, USA. (5)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA. (6)VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA, USA;
Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. (7)First 
Department of Pediatrics, Athens University Medical School, Aghia Sophia
Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece. (8)VA Center of Excellence for Stress and
Mental Health, San Diego, CA, USA; VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, CA,
USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
Electronic address: dgbaker@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a cytokine with pleiotropic actions in both
the periphery of the body and the central nervous system (CNS). Altered IL-6
secretion has been associated with inflammatory dysregulation and several adverse
health consequences. However, little is known about the physiological circadian
characteristics and dynamic inter-correlation between circulating and CNS IL-6
levels in humans, or their significance.
METHODS: Simultaneous assessment of plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) IL-6
levels was performed hourly in 11 healthy male volunteers over 24h, to
characterize physiological IL-6 secretion levels in both compartments.
RESULTS: IL-6 levels showed considerable within- and between-subject variability 
in both plasma and CSF, with plasma/CSF ratios revealing consistently higher
levels in the CSF. Both CSF and plasma IL-6 levels showed a distinctive circadian
variation, with CSF IL-6 levels exhibiting a main 24h, and plasma a biphasic 12h,
circadian component. Plasma peaks were roughly at 4 p.m. and 4 a.m., while the
CSF peak was at around 7 p.m. There was no correlation between coincident CSF and
plasma IL-6 values, but evidence for significant correlations at a negative 7-8h 
time lag.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides evidence in humans for a circadian IL-6 rhythm
in CSF and confirms prior observations reporting a plasma biphasic circadian
pattern. Our results indicate differential IL-6 regulation across the two
compartments and are consistent with local production of IL-6 in the CNS.
Possible physiological significance is discussed and implications for further
research are highlighted.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24767621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 16;447(4):660-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.04.062. Epub 2014 Apr 19.

Human adipocytes are highly sensitive to intermittent hypoxia induced NF-kappaB
activity and subsequent inflammatory gene expression.

Taylor CT(1), Kent BD(2), Crinion SJ(2), McNicholas WT(2), Ryan S(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine and Medical Science, The Conway Institute, University
College Dublin, Ireland. (2)School of Medicine and Medical Science, The Conway
Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland; Pulmonary and Sleep Disorders
Unit, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (3)School of Medicine
and Medical Science, The Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland;
Pulmonary and Sleep Disorders Unit, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin,
Ireland. Electronic address: silke.ryan@ucd.ie.

INTRODUCTION: Intermittent hypoxia (IH)-induced activation of pro-inflammatory
pathways is a major contributing factor to the cardiovascular pathophysiology
associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Obesity is commonly associated
with OSA although it remains unknown whether adipose tissue is a major source of 
inflammatory mediators in response to IH. The aim of this study was to test the
hypothesis that IH leads to augmented inflammatory responses in human adipocytes 
when compared to cells of non-adipocyte lineages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Human primary subcutaneous and visceral adipocytes, human
primary microvascular pulmonary endothelial cells (HUMEC-L) and human primary
small airway epithelial cells (SAEC) were exposed to 0, 6 or 12 cycles of IH or
stimulated with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α. IH led to a robust increase in
NF-κB DNA-binding activity in adipocytes compared with normoxic controls
regardless of whether the source of adipocytes was visceral or subcutaneous.
Notably, the NF-κB response of adipocytes to both IH and TNF-α was significantly 
greater than that in HUMEC-L and SAEC. Western blotting confirmed enhanced
nuclear translocation of p65 in adipocytes in response to IH, accompanied by
phosphorylation of I-κB. Parallel to p65 activation, we observed a significant
increase in secretion of the adipokines interleukin (IL)-8, IL-6 and TNF-α with
IH in adipocytes accompanied by significant upregulation of mRNA expression.
PCR-array suggested profound influence of IH on pro-inflammatory gene expression 
in adipocytes.
CONCLUSION: Human adipocytes demonstrate strong sensitivity to inflammatory gene 
expression in response to acute IH and hence, adipose tissue may be a key source 
of inflammatory mediators in OSA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24755071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2014 May;43:20-9. doi: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2014.01.019. 
Epub 2014 Jan 30.

Yoga reduces inflammatory signaling in fatigued breast cancer survivors: a
randomized controlled trial.

Bower JE(1), Greendale G(2), Crosswell AD(3), Garet D(4), Sternlieb B(5), Ganz
PA(6), Irwin MR(7), Olmstead R(8), Arevalo J(9), Cole SW(10).

Author information: 
(1)UCLA Department of Psychology, Los Angeles, CA, United States; UCLA Department
of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Cousins
Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
United States; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA,
United States. Electronic address: jbower@ucla.edu. (2)UCLA Department of
Geriatrics, Los Angeles, CA, United States. (3)UCLA Department of Psychology, Los
Angeles, CA, United States. (4)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel
Institute at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. (5)Pediatric Pain Program,
Mattel Children's Hospital at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States. (6)Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; UCLA Schools
of Medicine and Public Health, Los Angeles, CA, United States. (7)UCLA Department
of Psychology, Los Angeles, CA, United States; UCLA Department of Psychiatry and 
Biobehavioral Sciences, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Cousins Center for
Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States;
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(8)UCLA Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Los Angeles, CA,
United States; Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute at UCLA,
Los Angeles, CA, United States. (9)UCLA Department of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 
United States. (10)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute at
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States; UCLA Department of Medicine, Los Angeles,
CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Yoga is a popular mind-body therapy that has demonstrated beneficial 
effects on psychological, behavioral, and functional outcomes. However, few
studies have investigated effects on inflammatory processes. This study tested
the hypothesis that an Iyengar yoga intervention specifically designed for
fatigued breast cancer survivors would lead to decreases in inflammation-related 
gene expression and circulating markers of proinflammatory cytokine activity.
METHODS: Breast cancer survivors with persistent cancer-related fatigue were
randomized to a 12-week Iyengar yoga intervention (n=16) or a 12-week health
education control condition (n=15). Blood samples were collected at baseline,
post-intervention, and at a 3-month follow-up for genome-wide transcriptional
profiling and bioinformatic analyses. Plasma inflammatory markers and salivary
cortisol were also assessed.
RESULTS: In promoter-based bioinformatics analyses, the yoga group showed reduced
activity of the pro-inflammatory transcription factor nuclear factor kappa B
(NF-κB), increased activity of the anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid receptor, and
reduced activity of cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) family
transcription factors relative to controls (all ps<.05). There was also a
significant intervention effect on the soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor
type II (sTNF-RII), a marker of TNF activity; plasma levels of sTNF-RII remained 
stable in the yoga group, whereas levels of this marker increased in the health
education group (p=.028). A similar, non-significant trend was observed for the
interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (p=.16). No significant changes in C reactive
protein (CRP), interleukin 6 (IL-6), or diurnal cortisol measures were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: A 12-week restorative Iyengar yoga intervention reduced
inflammation-related gene expression in breast cancer survivors with persistent
fatigue. These findings suggest that a targeted yoga program may have beneficial 
effects on inflammatory activity in this patient population, with potential
relevance for behavioral and physical health.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4060606
PMID: 24703167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Sleep Res. 2014 Aug;23(4):425-31. doi: 10.1111/jsr.12138. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis, glucose metabolism and TNF-α in narcolepsy.

Maurovich-Horvat E(1), Keckeis M, Lattová Z, Kemlink D, Wetter TC, Schuld A,
Sonka K, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Center of Clinical Neuroscience, First Faculty of 
Medicine and General University Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic; Centre of Mental Health, Klinikum Ingolstadt, Ingolstadt, Germany; Max 
Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

Narcolepsy with cataplexy is caused by a deficiency in the production of
hypocretin/orexin, which regulates sleep and wakefulness, and also influences
appetite, neuroendocrine functions and metabolism. In this case-control study, 11
patients with narcolepsy with cataplexy and 11 healthy adults underwent an oral
glucose tolerance test, and dexamethasone suppression/corticotropin-releasing
hormone stimulation test. The average age of patients and controls was 35.1 ±
13.2 and 41.0 ± 2.9 years, respectively, body mass index was 28.1 ± 6.6 and 25.5 
± 4.7 kg m(-2) . We did not find evidence of a significantly increased prevalence
of disturbed glucose tolerance in patients with narcolepsy. After
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis suppression, the number of non-suppressors did
not differ between the groups, indicating normal negative feedback sensitivity.
The level of cortisol after dexamethasone suppression was significantly lower in 
patients with narcolepsy, suggesting a slight basal downregulation and/or a
slightly increased negative feedback sensitivity of the major endocrine stress
system in narcolepsy. Following corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation,
there were no significant differences in levels of adrenocorticotropic hormone or
cortisol, and in adrenocortical responsivity to adrenocorticotropic hormone.
Finally, patients with narcolepsy displayed significantly higher plasma levels of
tumour necrosis factor alpha, soluble tumour necrosis factor receptor p55,
soluble tumour necrosis factor receptor p75 and interleukin 6 after adjustment
for body mass index. The present study confirms that narcolepsy by itself is not 
associated with disturbances of glucose metabolism, but goes along with a subtle 
dysregulation of inflammatory cytokine production. We also found that dynamic
hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal system response is not altered, whereas negative
feedback to dexamethasone might be slightly enhanced.

© 2014 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 24650212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Clin Sleep Med. 2014 Mar 15;10(3):263-70. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.3524.

Impact of OSA on biological markers in morbid obesity and metabolic syndrome.

Salord N(1), Gasa M(2), Mayos M(3), Fortuna-Gutierrez AM(4), Montserrat JM(5),
Sánchez-de-la-Torre M(6), Barceló A(7), Barbé F(7), Vilarrasa N(8), Monasterio
C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari de
Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain ; Section of Respiratory Medicine,
Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain
; Universtitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Department of Medicine, Barcelona, Spain ; 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES),
Spain. (2)Sleep Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari
de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain ; Section of Respiratory Medicine,
Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat,
Spain. (3)Universtitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Department of Medicine, Barcelona, 
Spain ; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), Spain ; Sleep Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital de la
Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Spain ; Sleep Unit, Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), Spain ; Sleep Unit, Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital
Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en
Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Spain ; Respiratory Diseases
Research Unit, Hospital Universitari Arnau de Vilanova, IRB Lleida Lleida, Spain.
(7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias
(CIBERES), Spain ; Clinic Analysis Service, Hospital Universitari Son Espases,
Palma de Mallorca, Spain. (8)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition, Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain ; CIBER de Diabetes y
Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain. (9)Sleep Unit,
Department of Respiratory Medicine, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge,
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain ; Section of Respiratory Medicine, Bellvitge
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain ; Centro 
de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias (CIBERES), Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: There is compelling evidence that obstructive sleep
apnoea (OSA) can affect metabolic syndrome (MetS) and cardiovascular risk, but
the intermediate mechanisms through which it occurs have not been well defined.
We explored the impact of OSA in morbidly obese patients with MetS on adipokines,
pro-inflammatory markers, endothelial dysfunction, and atherosclerosis markers.
METHODS: We included 52 morbidly obese patients in an observational study matched
for age, gender and central obesity in 3 groups (OSA-MetS, Non-OSA-MetS, and Non 
OSA-non-MetS). Anthropometrical, blood pressure, and fasting blood measurements
were obtained the morning after an overnight polysomnography. VEGF, soluble CD40 
ligand (sCD40L), TNF-α, IL-6, leptin, adiponectin, and chemerin were determined
in serum by ELISA. OSA was defined as apnea/ hypopnea index ≥ 15 and MetS by
NCEP-ATP III.
RESULTS: Cases and control subjects did not differ in age, BMI, waist
circumference, and gender (43 ± 10 years, 46 ± 5 kg/m(2), 128 ± 10 cm, 71%
females). The cases had severe OSA with 47 (32-66) events/h, time spent < 90%
SpO2 7% (5%-31%). All groups presented similar serum cytokines, adipokines, VEGF,
and sCD40L levels.
CONCLUSIONS: In a morbidly obese population with established MetS, the presence
of OSA did not determine any differences in the studied mediators when matched by
central obesity. Morbidly obese NonOSA-NonMetS had a similar inflammatory,
adipokine VEGF, and sCD40L profile as those with established MetS, with or
without OSA. Obesity itself could overwhelm the effect of sleep apnea and MetS in
the studied biomarkers.
CITATION: Salord N; Gasa M; Mayos M; Fortuna-Gutierrez AM; Montserrat JM;
Sánchez-de-la-Torre M; Barceló A; Barbé F; Vilarrasa N; Monasterio C. Impact of
OSA on biological markers in morbid obesity and metabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3927431
PMID: 24634623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Clin Sleep Med. 2014 Mar 15;10(3):255-62. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.3522.

Modulation of inflammatory and hemostatic markers in obstructive sleep apnea
patients treated with mandibular advancement splints: a parallel, controlled
trial.

Niżankowska-Jędrzejczyk A(1), Almeida FR(2), Lowe AA(2), Kania A(3), Nastałek
P(3), Mejza F(3), Foley JH(4), Niżankowska-Mogilnicka E(3), Undas A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland. (2)Department of Oral Health Sciences, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)Department of Pulmonology, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Vermont, Burlington, VT. (5)Institute of Cardiology, Jagiellonian
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.

STUDY OBJECTIVE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with systemic
inflammation and a hypercoagulable state. The current study aim was to
investigate whether mandibular advancement splint (MAS) therapy affects
inflammatory and hemostatic parameters in patients with mild-to-moderate OSA.
METHODS: Twenty-two patients with mild-to-moderate OSA and 16 control subjects
were studied. OSA subjects were treated with a titratable MAS for 6 months.
Baseline plasma C-reactive protein, interleukin-1β, interleukin-10,
interleukin-6, P-selectin, fibrinogen, D-dimer, plasminogen activator inhibitor-1
(PAI-1), thrombin-antithrombin complex, activated thrombin-activatable
fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFIa), 6-keto-PGF1α, glucose, and fibrin clot lysis time
(CLT) were measured in all subjects. After 3 months of MAS therapy, measurements 
were repeated for the 22 patients, and after 6 months all measurements were
repeated for all study subjects.
RESULTS: MAS treatment reduced significantly AHI at 3 months (24 vs 13.1/h) and
further improved it at 6 months (13.1 vs 7.05/h). Compared with controls, OSA
subjects had a significant higher baseline mean levels of fibrinogen, TAFIa,
6-keto-PGF1α, and glucose. MAS treatment significantly improved levels of IL-1β, 
D-dimer, TAFIa, and CLT. Despite residual apneas, MAS treatment group presented
similar measured homeostatic and inflammatory levels to controls except for
glucose.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with MAS in mild-to-moderate OSA subjects improves the
inflammatory profile and homeostatic markers.
CITATION: Niżankowska-Jędrzejczyk A; Almeida FR; Lowe AA; Kania A; Nastałek P;
Mejza F; Foley JH; Niżankowska-Mogilnicka E; Undas A. Modulation of inflammatory 
and hemostatic markers in obstructive sleep apnea patients treated with
mandibular advancement splints: a parallel, controlled trial.

PMCID: PMC3927430
PMID: 24634622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Apr 15;306(8):E883-92. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00009.2014. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Reduced nocturnal ACTH-driven cortisol secretion during critical illness.

Boonen E(1), Meersseman P, Vervenne H, Meyfroidt G, Guïza F, Wouters PJ, Veldhuis
JD, Van den Berghe G.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Division and Laboratory of Intensive Care Medicine, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, and.

Recently, during critical illness, cortisol metabolism was found to be reduced.
We hypothesize that such reduced cortisol breakdown may suppress pulsatile ACTH
and cortisol secretion via feedback inhibition. To test this hypothesis,
nocturnal ACTH and cortisol secretory profiles were constructed by deconvolution 
analysis from plasma concentration time series in 40 matched critically ill
patients and eight healthy controls, excluding diseases or drugs that affect the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. Blood was sampled every 10 min between 2100 
and 0600 to quantify plasma concentrations of ACTH and (free) cortisol.
Approximate entropy, an estimation of process irregularity, cross-approximate
entropy, a measure of ACTH-cortisol asynchrony, and ACTH-cortisol dose-response
relationships were calculated. Total and free plasma cortisol concentrations were
higher at all times in patients than in controls (all P < 0.04). Pulsatile
cortisol secretion was 54% lower in patients than in controls (P = 0.005),
explained by reduced cortisol burst mass (P = 0.03), whereas cortisol pulse
frequency (P = 0.35) and nonpulsatile cortisol secretion (P = 0.80) were
unaltered. Pulsatile ACTH secretion was 31% lower in patients than in controls (P
= 0.03), again explained by a lower ACTH burst mass (P = 0.02), whereas ACTH
pulse frequency (P = 0.50) and nonpulsatile ACTH secretion (P = 0.80) were
unchanged. ACTH-cortisol dose response estimates were similar in patients and
controls. ACTH and cortisol approximate entropy were higher in patients (P ≤
0.03), as was ACTH-cortisol cross-approximate entropy (P ≤ 0.001). We conclude
that hypercortisolism during critical illness coincided with suppressed pulsatile
ACTH and cortisol secretion and a normal ACTH-cortisol dose response. Increased
irregularity and asynchrony of the ACTH and cortisol time series supported
non-ACTH-dependent mechanisms driving hypercortisolism during critical illness.

PMCID: PMC3989736
PMID: 24569590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Obes Surg. 2014 Jun;24(6):903-8. doi: 10.1007/s11695-014-1186-1.

A prospective study on inflammatory parameters in obese patients after sleeve
gastrectomy.

Gumbau V(1), Bruna M, Canelles E, Guaita M, Mulas C, Basés C, Celma I, Puche J,
Marcaida G, Oviedo M, Vázquez A.

Author information: 
(1)Esophago-gastric and Bariatric Surgery Unit, Department of General and
Digestive Surgery, Consorcio Hospital General Universitario, Valencia, Spain,
veronicagumbaup@hotmail.com.

Different hormones and peptides involved in inflammation have been studied in and
related to obesity. The aim of our work is to assess the variations of different 
molecules related to inflammation in obese patients during the first year
following sleeve gastrectomy. This was a prospective study on patients who
underwent sleeve gastrectomy. The variations in different clinical,
anthropometric, and analytical parameters related to inflammation were determined
and analysed in all patients at the preoperative visit and at the first and fifth
days, first and sixth months, and 1 year following surgery. We enrolled 20
patients to the study. The median body mass index (BMI) before intervention was
48.5 kg/m2. With respect to comorbidities, 70% of the patients had obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome (OSA), 65% high blood pressure, 45% dyslipidaemia, and 40% 
diabetes mellitus (DM). The median percentage of BMI lost (%BMIL) 1 year after
the intervention was 71%. The dyslipidaemia healing or improvement rate was 100%,
whereas it was 87.5% for diabetes, 84.6% for hypertension, and 57.1% for OSA.
During the 1-year postintervention period, the average levels of adiponectin
increased, although not significantly, whereas those of leptin significantly
decreased. In addition, the blood levels of MCP-1, IL-6, CRP, ferritin, and PAI-1
significantly decreased in that period. Sleeve gastrectomy is a surgical
technique that is associated with improvements in body weight and comorbid
conditions from the first postoperative months, which lead to significant
variations in the levels of different inflammation-related parameters and a
decrease in the levels of leptin, IL-6, CRP, MCP-1, ferritin, and serpin (PAI-1).

PMID: 24566661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Immunity. 2014 Feb 20;40(2):178-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.02.002.

Circadian clock proteins and immunity.

Curtis AM(1), Bellet MM(2), Sassone-Corsi P(2), O'Neill LA(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic address: acurtis@tcd.ie.
(2)Center for Epigenetics and Metabolism, Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (3)School of
Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic address: laoneill@tcd.ie.

Immune parameters change with time of day and disruption of circadian rhythms has
been linked to inflammatory pathologies. A circadian-clock-controlled immune
system might allow an organism to anticipate daily changes in activity and
feeding and the associated risk of infection or tissue damage to the host.
Responses to bacteria have been shown to vary depending on time of infection,
with mice being more at risk of sepsis when challenged ahead of their activity
phase. Studies highlight the extent to which the molecular clock, most notably
the core clock proteins BMAL1, CLOCK, and REV-ERBα, control fundamental aspects
of the immune response. Examples include the BMAL1:CLOCK heterodimer regulating
toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) expression and repressing expression of the
inflammatory monocyte chemokine ligand (CCL2) as well as REV-ERBα suppressing the
induction of interleukin-6. Understanding the daily rhythm of the immune system
could have implications for vaccinations and how we manage infectious and
inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24560196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Psychiatry Res. 2014 Apr 30;216(1):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2014.01.046.
Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Lower health related quality of life in U.S. military personnel is associated
with service-related disorders and inflammation.

Gill J(1), Lee H(2), Barr T(3), Baxter T(4), Heinzelmann M(2), Rak H(2),
Mysliwiec V(4).

Author information: 
(1)National Institutes of Health National Institutes of Nursing Research, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: gillj@mail.nih.gov.
(2)National Institutes of Health National Institutes of Nursing Research, 10
Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)West Virginia University, 1 Medical
Center Drive, Morgantown, WV 26506, USA. (4)Madigan Army Medical Center, 9040A
Fitzsimmons Avenue, Tacoma, WA 98431, USA.

Military personnel who have combat exposures are at increased risk for the
service-related disorders of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), depression,
sleep disturbances and decreased health related quality of life (HRQOL). Those
with a traumatic brain injury (TBI) are at even greater risk. Inflammation is
associated with these disorders and may underlie the risk for health declines. We
evaluated 110 recently deployed, military personnel presenting with sleep
disturbances for service-related disorders (TBI, PTSD, and depression) as well as
HRQOL. ANOVA models were used to examine differences among military personnel
with two or more service-related disorders (high comorbid group), or one or no
disorders (low comorbid group). Logistic regression models were used to determine
associations among interleukin-6 (IL-6) to HRQOL and service-related disorders.
Approximately one-third of the sample had two or more service-related disorders. 
HRQOL was lower and IL-6 concentrations were higher in military personnel with
PTSD or depression, with the most profound differences in those with more
service-related disorders, regardless of sleep disorder. Having symptoms of
depression and PTSD resulted in a 3.5-fold risk to be in the lower quartile of
HRQOL and the highest quartile of IL-6. In a linear regression model, 41% of the 
relationship between HRQOL and IL-6 concentrations was mediated by PTSD and
depression. Military personnel with PTSD and depression are at high risk for
lower HRQOL, and higher IL-6 concentrations. Comprehensive treatment is required 
to address co-occurring service-related disorders in military personnel to
promote health and well-being.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24559851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2014;21(2-3):95-101. doi: 10.1159/000356535. Epub 2014 Feb
14.

Chronic low-grade inflammation in metabolic disorders: relevance for behavioral
symptoms.

Lasselin J(1), Capuron L.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Integrative Neurobiology (NutriNeuro), UMR 1286, National
Institute of Agricultural Research (INRA) and Bordeaux University, Bordeaux,
France.

The ability of cytokines to influence cerebral functions and to induce the
development of behavioral alterations is well established in conditions of acute 
or chronic high-grade activation of the innate immune system. Recent evidence
suggests that the release of these immune mediators during chronic low-grade
endogenous inflammatory processes may also contribute to the development of
behavioral alterations. Metabolic disorders, including obesity, type 2 diabetes
and the metabolic syndrome, represent examples of those conditions which are both
characterized by a chronic low-grade inflammatory state and an increased
prevalence of behavioral disorders. In metabolic disorders, the increased
production of acute-phase proteins and cytokines (e.g. C-reactive protein,
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α), but at relatively low levels, may
promote and contribute to the development of behavioral symptoms, including
depressive symptoms, cognitive impairment, fatigue, sleep problems and pain. This
hypothesis is supported by a growing literature referring both to experimental
and clinical findings that will be reviewed here.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 24557041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Molecules. 2014 Jan 29;19(2):1651-62. doi: 10.3390/molecules19021651.

Correlation between inflammatory markers of atherosclerosis and carotid
intima-media thickness in Obstructive Sleep Apnea.

Ciccone MM(1), Scicchitano P(2), Zito A(3), Cortese F(4), Boninfante B(5),
Falcone VA(6), Quaranta VN(7), Ventura VA(8), Zucano A(9), Di Serio F(10),
Damiani MF(11), Resta O(12).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Diseases Section, Department of Emergency and Organ
Transplantation (DETO), University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy.
marcomatteo.ciccone@uniba.it. (2)Cardiovascular Diseases Section, Department of
Emergency and Organ Transplantation (DETO), University of Bari, Bari 70124,
Italy. piero.sc@hotmail.it. (3)Cardiovascular Diseases Section, Department of
Emergency and Organ Transplantation (DETO), University of Bari, Bari 70124,
Italy. annapaolazito@yahoo.it. (4)Cardiovascular Diseases Section, Department of 
Emergency and Organ Transplantation (DETO), University of Bari, Bari 70124,
Italy. francescacortese@hotmail.it. (5)Institute of Respiratory Disease,
University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. b.boninfante@alice.it. (6)Institute of
Respiratory Disease, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. iposoli9@gmail.com.
(7)Institute of Respiratory Disease, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy.
vitaliano40@libero.it. (8)Institute of Respiratory Disease, University of Bari,
Bari 70124, Italy. valevent@libero.it. (9)Section of Clinical Pathology,
University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. azucano@libero.it. (10)Section of Clinical
Pathology, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy. diseriofrancesca@tiscali.it.
(11)Institute of Respiratory Disease, University of Bari, Bari 70124, Italy.
mariodmn84@hotmail.com. (12)Institute of Respiratory Disease, University of Bari,
Bari 70124, Italy. onofrio.resta@uniba.it.

Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) is a sleep-related breathing disorder associated
with the development of cardiovascular diseases and atherosclerosis. Systemic
inflammation plays an important role in the development of cardiovascular
complications in OSA patients. The aim of the study was to evaluate the
relationship between carotid intima-media thickness (cIMT) and inflammatory
markers plasma levels in OSA patients. We enrolled 80 OSA patients and 40
controls matched for age and body mass index (BMI). The presence and severity of 
sleep apnea was determined by in-laboratory portable monitoring (PM). Demographic
data, blood pressure, heart rate, and cIMT were measured. High-sensitive
C-Reactive Protein (hsCRP), interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and
pentraxin (PTX)-3 serum concentrations were detected. cIMT was higher in OSA
patients than controls (0.89 ± 0.13 mm vs. 0.65 ± 0.1 mm, p < 0.01).
Moderate-severe OSA patients (0.95 ± 0.09 mm) had significantly increased cIMT
than mild OSA (0.76 ± 0.1 mm; p < 0.01) and control (0.65 ± 0.1 mm; p < 0.01).
hsCRP, IL-6, TNF-α, and PTX-3 in patients with OSA (1.67 ± 0.66 mg/L, 2.86 ± 1.39
pg/mL, 20.09 ± 5.39 pg/mL, 2.1 ± 0.59 ng/mL, respectively) were significantly
higher than in controls (1.08 ± 0.53 mg/L, p < 0.01; 1.5 ± 0.67 pg/mL, p < 0.01; 
12.53 ± 3.48 pg/mL, p < 0.01; 1.45 ± 0.41 ng/mL, p < 0.01, respectively). Carotid
IMT was significantly correlated to CRP (r = 0.44; p < 0.01), IL-6 (r = 0.42; p <
0.01), TNF-α (r = 0.53; p < 0.01), and PTX-3 (r = 0.49; p < 0.01). OSA patients
showed increased cIMT, CRP, IL-6, TNF-α, and PTX-3 levels. Inflammatory markers
levels are correlated to cIMT in OSA patients.

PMID: 24481114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 27;9(1):e87413. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087413. eCollection
2014.

Pronounced inflammatory response to endotoxaemia during nighttime: a randomised
cross-over trial.

Alamili M(1), Bendtzen K(2), Lykkesfeldt J(3), Rosenberg J(1), Gögenur I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, University of Copenhagen, Herlev
Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. (2)Institute for Inflammation Research, Department of 
Rheumatology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Denmark.
(3)Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, Faculty of Health and Medical
Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Circadian variation in bodily functions has been shown to impact
health in acute and chronic medical conditions. Little is known about the
relationship between circadian rhythm and sepsis in humans. We aimed to
investigate circadian variations in the host response in a human endotoxaemia
model.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A cross-over study, where 12 healthy young men received E.
coli endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) 0.3 ng/kg at 12 noon and, on another
day, at 12 midnight. Blood samples were analysed for pro- and anti-inflammatory
cytokines: tumour-necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, soluble TNF receptors (sTNF-R)-1
and -2, interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra), IL-6, and
IL-10 as well as YKL-40 and the oxidative stress markers malondialdehyde (MDA),
ascorbic acid (AA) and dehydroascorbic acid (DHA) before and at 2, 4, 6 and 8
hours after LPS administration.
RESULTS: The levels of MDA and IL-10 where significantly higher during the day
time (P<0.05) whereas levels of TNF-alpha, sTNF-RI, sTNF-RII, IL-1Ra, IL-6, and
YKL-40 were higher (P<0.01 for all comparisons) during the night time. No
significant differences were seen in the levels of AA and DHA.
CONCLUSION: A day-night difference in the acute phase response to endotoxaemia
exists in healthy volunteers with a more pronounced inflammatory response during 
the night time. This circadian difference in the response to endotoxaemia may
play an important role in the clinical setting and should be investigated
further.

PMCID: PMC3903723
PMID: 24475284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Periodontol. 2014 Jul;85(7):e251-8. doi: 10.1902/jop.2014.130579. Epub 2014 Jan
13.

Salivary cytokines and the association between obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
and periodontal disease.

Nizam N(1), Basoglu OK, Tasbakan MS, Nalbantsoy A, Buduneli N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry, Ege University, İzmir,
Turkey.

BACKGROUND: A higher prevalence of periodontal disease has been reported in
patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), and these two chronic
conditions may be linked via inflammatory pathways. The aim of the present study 
is to evaluate the salivary interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, IL-21, IL-33, and
pentraxin-3 (PTX3) concentrations in patients with and without OSAS.
METHODS: A total of 52 patients were included in the study. Thirteen individuals 
were in the control (non-OSAS) group, 17 were in the mild/moderate OSAS group,
and 22 were in the severe OSAS group. Clinical periodontal measurements were
recorded, and saliva samples were obtained before initiation of periodontal
intervention. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was used to determine salivary
cytokine concentrations. Data were statistically analyzed using
D'Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality, Spearman ρ rank, Kruskal-Wallis, and Dunn
tests.
RESULTS: Salivary IL-6 and IL-33 concentrations were similar in the two OSAS
groups (P >0.05), which were statistically higher than the control group (P
<0.05). IL-1β, IL-21, and PTX3 concentrations were similar in the study groups.
The only significant correlation between clinical periodontal parameters and
salivary cytokines was found between clinical attachment level (CAL) and IL-21 (P
= 0.02). Highly significant correlations were found between probing depth, CAL
measures, and indicators of OSAS severity (P <0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings suggest that OSAS may have an increasing effect
on salivary IL-6 and IL-33 concentrations regardless of OSAS severity. Additional
investigation is required to elucidate a potential bidirectional relationship
between OSAS and periodontal disease.

PMID: 24410293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Sleep Med. 2014 Feb;15(2):228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.08.795. Epub 2013 Dec
4.

Variants in C-reactive protein and IL-6 genes and susceptibility to obstructive
sleep apnea in children: a candidate-gene association study in European American 
and Southeast European populations.

Kaditis AG(1), Gozal D(2), Khalyfa A(2), Kheirandish-Gozal L(2), Capdevila OS(3),
Gourgoulianis K(4), Alexopoulos EI(4), Chaidas K(4), Bhattacharjee R(2), Kim
J(2), Rodopoulou P(5), Zintzaras E(6).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, School of Medicine and
Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece. Electronic address:
kaditia@hotmail.com. (2)Section of Pediatric Sleep Medicine, Department of
Pediatrics, Pritzker School of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
United States; Division of Pediatric Sleep Medicine and Kosair Children's
Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, United States. (3)Division of Pediatric Sleep Medicine and Kosair
Children's Hospital Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States. (4)Sleep Disorders Laboratory, Larissa
University Hospital, Larissa, Greece. (5)Department of Biomathematics, University
of Thessaly School of Medicine, Larissa, Greece. (6)Department of Biomathematics,
University of Thessaly School of Medicine, Larissa, Greece; Center for Clinical
Evidence Synthesis, The Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy
Studies, Tufts Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA,
United States.

BACKGROUND: Preliminary evidence indicates that variants of the C-reactive
protein (CRP) and IL-6 genes might be associated with the presence of obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA) in childhood. Thus a candidate-gene association study was
conducted to investigate the association of four variants of the CRP gene
(1444C/T, -717T/C, 1861C/T, and 1919A/T) and two variants of the IL-6 gene
(-174G/C and 597G/A) with OSA in a cohort of European American and Greek
children.
METHODS: The genetic risk effects were estimated based on the odds ratio (OR) of 
the allele contrast and the generalized odds ratio (ORG), which is a model-free
approach. The mode of inheritance was assessed using the degree of dominance
index. The impact of haplotypes was also examined.
RESULTS: In the American population, the allele contrast and the model-free
approach produced significant ORs for the CRP 1444C/T variant (OR, 3.82 [95%
confidence interval {CI}, 1.91-7.63] and ORG, 4.37 [95% CI, 1.96-9.76]),
respectively, and the mode of inheritance was recessiveness of allele T.
Significance was also shown for the CRP 1919A/T variant (OR, 2.45 [95% CI,
1.23-4.85] and ORG, 2.76 [95% CI, 1.26-6.03]) with the mode of inheritance being 
nondominance of allele T. For the IL-6-174G/C variant, there was an indication of
recessiveness of allele C. Finally, the IL-6-174C/IL-6 597A haplotype was
associated with OSA. In the Greek population, no association was detected for any
variant or haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variation in the IL-6/CRP pathway was associated with
increased risk for OSA in European American children and may account for the
higher CRP levels in the context of pediatric OSA compared to Greek children.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3940266
PMID: 24380782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2014 May;210(5):445.e1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2013.11.037.
Epub 2013 Nov 28.

Longitudinal expression of Toll-like receptors on dendritic cells in
uncomplicated pregnancy and postpartum.

Young BC(1), Stanic AK(1), Panda B(2), Rueda BR(1), Panda A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Tufts Medical Center, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
MA. (3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.

OBJECTIVE: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are integral parts of the innate immune
system and have been implicated in complications of pregnancy. The longitudinal
expression of TLRs on dendritic cells in the maternal circulation during
uncomplicated pregnancies is unknown. The objective of this study was to
prospectively evaluate TLRs 1-9 as expressed on dendritic cells in the maternal
circulation at defined intervals throughout pregnancy and postpartum.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a prospective cohort of 30 pregnant women with
uncomplicated pregnancies and 30 nonpregnant controls. TLRs and cytokine
expression was measured in unstimulated dendritic cells at 4 defined intervals
during pregnancy and postpartum. Basal expression of TLRs and cytokines was
measured by multicolor flow cytometry. The percent-positive dendritic cells for
each TLRs were compared with both nonpregnant and postpartum levels with
multivariate linear regression.
RESULTS: TLRs 1, 7, and 9 were elevated compared with nonpregnant controls with
persistent elevation of TLR 1 and interleukin-12 (IL-12) into the postpartum
period. Concordantly, levels of IL-6, IL-12, interferon alpha, and tumor necrosis
factor alpha increased during pregnancy and returned to levels similar to
nonpregnant controls during the postpartum period. The elevated levels of TLR 1
and IL-12 were persistent postpartum, challenging notions that immunologic
changes during pregnancy resolve after the prototypical postpartum period.
CONCLUSION: Normal pregnancy is associated with time-dependent changes in TLR
expression compared with nonpregnant controls; these findings may help elucidate 
immunologic dysfunction in complicated pregnancies.

Copyright © 2014 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4374641
PMID: 24291497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Respir Med. 2014 Jan;108(1):162-70. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2013.11.002. Epub 2013
Nov 13.

One airway: Biomarkers of protection from upper and lower airway injury after
World Trade Center exposure.

Cho SJ(1), Echevarria GC(2), Kwon S(1), Naveed B(1), Schenck EJ(1), Tsukiji J(1),
Rom WN(3), Prezant DJ(4), Nolan A(5), Weiden MD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, New York University, School of
Medicine New York, NY, USA. (2)División de Anestesiología, Escuela de Medicina,
Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; New York University,
School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. (3)Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, New York University, School of Medicine New
York, NY, USA; New York University, School of Medicine, Department of
Environmental Medicine, Tuxedo Park, NY, USA. (4)Bureau of Health Services and
Office of Medical Affairs, Fire Department of New York, Brooklyn, NY, USA;
Pulmonary Medicine Division, Department of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center
and Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. (5)Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, New York University, School of Medicine New
York, NY, USA; New York University, School of Medicine, Department of
Environmental Medicine, Tuxedo Park, NY, USA; Bureau of Health Services and
Office of Medical Affairs, Fire Department of New York, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
(6)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, New York University, School of
Medicine New York, NY, USA; New York University, School of Medicine, Department
of Environmental Medicine, Tuxedo Park, NY, USA; Bureau of Health Services and
Office of Medical Affairs, Fire Department of New York, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
Electronic address: michael.weiden@med.nyu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Firefighters exposed to World Trade Center (WTC) dust have developed 
chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) and abnormal forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1).
Overlapping but distinct immune responses may be responsible for the clinical
manifestations of upper and lower airway injury. We investigated whether a panel 
of inflammatory cytokines, either associated or not associated with WTC-LI, can
predict future chronic rhinosinusitis disease and its severity.
METHODS: Serum obtained within six months of 9/11/2001 from 179 WTC exposed
firefighters presenting for subspecialty evaluation prior to 3/2008 was assayed
for 39 cytokines. The main outcomes were medically managed CRS (N = 62) and more 
severe CRS cases requiring sinus surgery (N = 14). We tested biomarker-CRS
severity association using ordinal logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: Increasing serum IL-6, IL-8, GRO and neutrophil concentration reduced
the risk of CRS progression. Conversely, increasing TNF-α increased the risk of
progression. In a multivariable model adjusted for exposure intensity, increasing
IL-6, TNF-α and neutrophil concentration remained significant predictors of
progression. Elevated IL-6 levels and neutrophil counts also reduced the risk of 
abnormal FEV1 but in contrast to CRS, increased TNF-α did not increase the risk
of abnormal FEV1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates both independent and overlapping biomarker
associations with upper and lower respiratory injury, and suggests that the
innate immune response may play a protective role against CRS and abnormal lung
function in those with WTC exposure.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3946892
PMID: 24290899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Jan 1;189(1):66-76. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201307-1339OC.

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome affects liver histology and inflammatory cell
activation in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, regardless of
obesity/insulin resistance.

Nobili V(1), Cutrera R, Liccardo D, Pavone M, Devito R, Giorgio V, Verrillo E,
Baviera G, Musso G.

Author information: 
(1)1 HepatoMetabolic Diseases Unit.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Jan 1;189(1):13-5.

RATIONALE: Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) and nonalcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) are frequently encountered in obese children. Whether OSAS and
intermittent hypoxia are associated with liver injury in pediatric NAFLD is
unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the relationship of OSAS with liver injury in pediatric
NAFLD.
METHODS: Sixty-five consecutive children with biopsy-proven NAFLD (age, mean ±
SD, 11.7 ± 2.1 yr; 58% boys; body mass index z score, 1.93 ± 0.61) underwent a
clinical-biochemical assessment and a standard polysomnography. Insulin
sensitivity, circulating proinflammatory cytokines, markers of hepatocyte
apoptosis (cytokeratin-18 fragments), and hepatic fibrogenesis (hyaluronic acid) 
were measured. Liver inflammatory infiltrate was characterized by
immunohistochemistry for CD45, CD3, and CD163, surface markers of leukocytes, T
cells, and activated macrophage/Kupffer cells, respectively. OSAS was defined by 
an apnea/hypopnea index (AHI) greater than or equal to 1 event/h, and severe OSAS
was defined by an AHI greater than or equal to 5 events/h.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Fifty-five percent of children with NAFLD had
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and 34% had significant (stage F ≥ 2)
fibrosis. OSAS affected 60% of children with NAFLD; the presence and severity of 
OSAS were associated with the presence of NASH (odds ratio, 4.89; 95% confidence 
interval, 3.08-5.98; P = 0.0001), significant fibrosis (odds ratio, 5.91; 95%
confidence interval, 3.23-7.42; P = 0.0001), and NAFLD activity score (β, 0.347; 
P = 0.029), independently of body mass index, abdominal adiposity, metabolic
syndrome, and insulin resistance. This relationship held also in nonobese
children with NAFLD. The duration of hemoglobin desaturation (Sa(O2) < 90%)
correlated with increased intrahepatic leukocytes and activated
macrophages/Kupffer cells and with circulating markers of hepatocyte apoptosis
and fibrogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: In pediatric NAFLD, OSAS is associated with biochemical,
immunohistochemical, and histological features of NASH and fibrosis. The impact
of hypoxemia correction on liver disease severity warrants evaluation in future
trials.

PMID: 24256086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Craniofac Surg. 2013 Nov;24(6):1908-13. doi: 10.1097/SCS.0b013e3182a41c05.

Is there an effect of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome on oxidative stress and
inflammatory parameters in patients with craniofacial anomalies?

Driessen C(1), Plomp RG, van der Spek PJ, Ince C, Kulik W, Mathijssen IM, Joosten
KF.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of *Plastic, Reconstructive and Hand Surgery,
†Bioinformatics, ‡Intensive Care Medicine, and §Department of Biochemistry,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, and ∥Pediatrics, Dutch Craniofacial Centre,
Erasmuc Medical Center, Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome (OSAS) exhibits oxidative stress and inflammation in patients who have a
congenital, craniofacial anomaly.This prospective, cross-sectional cohort study
included ambulant sleep study data to asses OSAS in patients with syndromic
craniosynostosis and Treacher Collins syndrome. Laboratory analyses were
performed including malondialdehyde, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α), interleukin
6, and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein.Forty-eight patients were included; 11
were adults; 37 were children. The patients' body mass indexes were normal, with 
a median (SD) of 0.7 (-1.82 to 2.48) in children and 20.5 (15.2-29.4) in adults. 
Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome was diagnosed in 23 of 48 patients. It was mild 
(median obstructive apnea-hypopnea index [oAHI], 2.3; oxygenation-desaturation
index [ODI], 0.9) in 16 patients and moderate/severe in 7 patients (median oAHI, 
10.8; ODI, 5.0). Neither oxidative stress nor inflammation had a correlation with
the oAHI and ODI. Only TNF-α was found significantly higher in both the OSAS and 
non-OSAS groups compared with the reference values (median, 15.1 pg/mL and 12.3
pg/mL versus 4.05 [0.0-8.1 pg/mL], P < 0.001 and P < 0.001, respectively).Based
on our findings we conclude that (mainly mild) OSAS, oxidative stress, as well as
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein and interleukin 6 levels are not abnormal in 
the day time in a population of nonobese patients with a craniofacial anomaly.
The increased level of TNF-α cannot be explained by OSAS. Future research should 
focus on mapping chronobiologic changes for further interpretation of the
results.

PMID: 24220372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2014 Jun;46(6):1077-88. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000000210.

Biobehavioral factors mediate exercise effects on fatigue in breast cancer
survivors.

Rogers LQ(1), Vicari S, Trammell R, Hopkins-Price P, Fogleman A, Spenner A, Rao
K, Courneya KS, Hoelzer KS, Robbs R, Verhulst S.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, AL; 2Department of Psychiatry, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield,
IL; 3Department of Internal Medicine, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield, IL;
4Center for Clinical Research, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield, IL;
5Department of Medicine, SIU School of Medicine, Springfield, IL; 6Department of 
Physical Education and Recreation, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
CANADA; and 7Department of Hematology Oncology, Springfield Clinic, Sprinfield,
IL.

PURPOSE: This study aimed to examine mediators of fatigue response to an exercise
intervention for breast cancer survivors in a pilot randomized controlled trial.
METHODS: Postmenopausal breast cancer survivors (n = 46; ≤stage 2), off primary
treatment, and reporting fatigue and/or sleep dysfunction were randomized to a
3-month exercise intervention (160 min·wk of moderate-intensity aerobic walking, 
twice weekly resistance training with resistance bands) or control group. Six
discussion group sessions provided behavioral support to improve adherence.
Fatigue, serum cytokines, accelerometer physical activity, cardiorespiratory
fitness, sleep dysfunction, and psychosocial factors were assessed at baseline
and 3 months.
RESULTS: The exercise intervention effect sizes for fatigue were as follows:
fatigue intensity d = 0.30 (P = 0.34), interference d = -0.38 (P = 0.22), and
general fatigue d = -0.49 (P = 0.13). Using the Freedman-Schatzkin
difference-in-coefficients tests, increase in fatigue intensity was significantly
mediated by interleukin 6 (IL-6) (82%), IL-10 (94%), IL-6/IL-10 (49%), and tumor 
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α):IL-10 (78%) with reduced sleep dysfunction increasing
the relationship between intervention and fatigue intensity rather than mediating
intervention effects (-88%). Decrease in fatigue interference was mediated by
sleep dysfunction (35%), whereas IL-10 and pro-anti-inflammatory cytokine ratios 
increased the relationship between intervention and interference (-25% to -40%). 
The reduction in general fatigue was significantly mediated by minutes of
physical activity (76%), sleep dysfunction (45%), and physical activity enjoyment
(40%), with IL-10 (-40%) and IL-6/IL-10 (-11%) increasing the
intervention-fatigue relationship. In the intervention group, higher baseline
fatigue, anxiety, depression, and perceived exercise barrier interference
predicted a greater decline in fatigue interference and/or general fatigue during
the intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Biobehavioral factors mediated and enhanced intervention effects on 
fatigue, whereas psychosocial factors predicted fatigue response. Further study
is warranted to confirm our results and to improve understanding of relationships
that mediate and strengthen the intervention-fatigue association.

PMCID: PMC4435796
PMID: 24212124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 16;8(10):e76098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076098.
eCollection 2013.

Development of transgenic minipigs with expression of antimorphic human
cryptochrome 1.

Liu H(1), Li Y, Wei Q, Liu C, Bolund L, Vajta G, Dou H, Yang W, Xu Y, Luan J,
Wang J, Yang H, Staunstrup NH, Du Y.

Author information: 
(1)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China ; ShenZhen Engineering Laboratory for
Genomics-Assisted Animal Breeding, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.

Minipigs have become important biomedical models for human ailments due to
similarities in organ anatomy, physiology, and circadian rhythms relative to
humans. The homeostasis of circadian rhythms in both central and peripheral
tissues is pivotal for numerous biological processes. Hence, biological rhythm
disorders may contribute to the onset of cancers and metabolic disorders
including obesity and type II diabetes, amongst others. A tight regulation of
circadian clock effectors ensures a rhythmic expression profile of output genes
which, depending on cell type, constitute about 3-20% of the transcribed
mammalian genome. Central to this system is the negative regulator protein
Cryptochrome 1 (CRY1) of which the dysfunction or absence has been linked to the 
pathogenesis of rhythm disorders. In this study, we generated transgenic
Bama-minipigs featuring expression of the Cys414-Ala antimorphic human
Cryptochrome 1 mutant (hCRY1(AP)). Using transgenic donor fibroblasts as nuclear 
donors, the method of handmade cloning (HMC) was used to produce reconstructed
embryos, subsequently transferred to surrogate sows. A total of 23 viable piglets
were delivered. All were transgenic and seemingly healthy. However, two pigs with
high transgene expression succumbed during the first two months. Molecular
analyzes in epidermal fibroblasts demonstrated disturbances to the expression
profile of core circadian clock genes and elevated expression of the
proinflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-α, known to be risk factors in cancer and 
metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC3797822
PMID: 24146819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Clin Sleep Med. 2013 Oct 15;9(10):1003-12. doi: 10.5664/jcsm.3070.

Serum inflammatory markers in obstructive sleep apnea: a meta-analysis.

Nadeem R(1), Molnar J, Madbouly EM, Nida M, Aggarwal S, Sajid H, Naseem J, Loomba
R.

Author information: 
(1)Captain James A. Lovell Federal Health Care Centre, North Chicago, IL ;
Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science/ Chicago Medical School,
North Chicago, IL.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has been linked to and is
associated with increased cardiovascular and cerebrovascular morbidity. Ongoing
inflammatory responses play an important role in this association. Multiple small
size studies addressing the profile of the inflammatory markers in OSA are
available therefore we performed a meta-analysis.
METHODS: Systematic review of medical literature was conducted using PubMed,
Cochrane, and EMBASE databases from 1968 to 2011 by utilizing the key words
obstructive sleep apnea, C-Reactive protein, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α),
interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 8 (IL-8), intercellular adhesion molecule
(ICAM), vascular cell adhesion molecule (VCAM) and Selectins. Inclusion criteria 
were: full text English articles; studies with adult population; reported values 
for at least one of the markers of interest; with at least two separate groups
(subjects with OSA and control group); OSA was defined as AHI of ≥ 5/h.
RESULTS: Five hundred and twelve studies were reviewed for inclusion with 51
studies pooled for analysis (30 studies for CRP, 19 studies for TNF-α, 8 studies 
for ICAM, 18 studies for IL-6, six studies for VCAM and 5 studies for Selectins).
The levels of inflammatory markers were higher in patients with OSA compared to
control group. Standardized pooled Mean differences were calculated to be 1.77
for CRP, 1.03 for TNF-α, 2.16 for IL-6, 4.22 for IL-8, 2.93 for ICAM, 1.45 for
Selectins and 2.08 for VCAM.
CONCLUSIONS: In this meta-analysis, the levels of systemic inflammatory markers
were found to be higher in OSA patients compared to control subjects.

PMCID: PMC3778171
PMID: 24127144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Andrology. 2013 Nov;1(6):872-8. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-2927.2013.00136.x. Epub 2013 
Oct 7.

The association between TNF-α and erectile dysfunction complaints.

Matos G(1), Hirotsu C, Alvarenga TA, Cintra F, Bittencourt L, Tufik S, Andersen
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Inflammatory markers like tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) have been related 
to erectile dysfunction (ED) and may interact with other cardiovascular risk
factors such as obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS). The aim of this study
was to examine the inflammatory, metabolic and hormonal profile of men with or
without ED complaints and/or OSAS recruited through the Epidemiologic Sleep Study
(EPISONO). A sample of 363 men completed sexual questionnaires for ED and had
physical and blood examinations. OSAS was evaluated by polysomnography and
clinical assessment. The blood samples were used for determination of TNF-α,
interleukin-6, leptin, cholesterol and fractions, triglycerides, homocysteine,
glucose and hormonal levels. After controlling for confounding factors, men with 
ED complaints presented higher systolic blood pressure and TNF-α, independent of 
OSAS. Significant interaction between ED and OSAS was only observed for neck
circumference, which was higher in ED men with OSAS than men with OSAS without ED
and men with ED without OSAS. Binary logistic regression showed that the
predictor factors for ED were age >43 years, myocardial infarction events, TNF-α 
and systolic blood pressure. Finally, a receiver-operating characteristics curve 
suggested a cut-off point of 9.95 pg/mL for TNF-α with sensitivity of 60% and
specificity of 59% in men with ED complaints. Furthermore, there was a
significant association between high levels of TNF-α (>9.95 pg/mL) and the
presence of ED complaints. The results showed that there was an association
between TNF-α levels and ED complaints in men independent of OSAS.

© 2013 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 24123864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Med Hypotheses. 2013 Dec;81(6):1031-3. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.09.025. Epub 2013
Sep 27.

Disturbed sleep in bipolar disorder is related to an elevation of IL-6 in
peripheral monocytes.

Ritter PS(1), Kretschmer K, Pfennig A, Soltmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Universitatsklinikum
Carl Gustav Carus, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. Electronic
address: philipp.ritter@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Bipolar disorder is a severe psychiatric disorder that is associated with
persistent changes in the quality, duration and architecture of sleep. Currently 
there is no unifying hypothesis explaining the alterations in sleep observable in
patients with bipolar disorder and management is often difficult though vital.
Sleep is modified by various cytokines including IL-6. Elevated levels of IL-6
are associated with a poorer quality of sleep and changes in the architecture of 
sleep similar to those observed in bipolar disorder. Therapeutic administration
of Interferon causes elevations of intrathecal IL-6 concentrations and appears to
provoke a deteriorating quality of sleep. The blockade of IL-6 with tocilizumab
in rheumatoid arthritis is associated with improvements in the quality of sleep. 
Bipolar disorder is associated with elevated levels of IL-6 and in particular
elevated levels of mRNA coding for IL-6 in peripheral monocytes. We propose that 
the changes observed in the sleep of patients with bipolar disorder are related
to the elevation of IL-6 and that this correlates with an elevated expression of 
mRNA coding for IL-6 expression in peripheral monocytes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 4;93(18-19):664-72. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.09.001. Epub 2013 
Sep 17.

Pancreatic β cell proliferation by intermittent hypoxia via up-regulation of Reg 
family genes and HGF gene.

Ota H(1), Itaya-Hironaka A, Yamauchi A, Sakuramoto-Tsuchida S, Miyaoka T,
Fujimura T, Tsujinaka H, Yoshimoto K, Nakagawara K, Tamaki S, Takasawa S, Kimura 
H.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Nara Medical University, Kashihara
634-8521, Nara, Japan.

AIMS: Although accumulating evidence suggests the associations between sleep
apnea syndrome (SAS) and type 2 diabetes, the direct effect of intermittent
hypoxia (IH) on pancreatic β cell proliferation remains a missing piece of the
puzzle.
MAIN METHODS: Rat RINm5F β cells, hamster HIT-T15 β cells, and human 1.1B4 β
cells were exposed to normoxia (21% O2, 5% CO2, and balance N2), to sustained
hypoxia (SH: 1% O2, 5% CO2, and balance N2), or to intermittent hypoxia (IH: 64
cycles of 5 min SH and 10 min normoxia) for 24 h. After the treatment, cellular
proliferation and apoptosis were measured by WST-8 assay and TUNEL method,
respectively. The expression of regenerating gene (Reg) family, interleukin
(IL)-6, and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) was determined by real-time RT-PCR.
KEY FINDINGS: The cellular proliferation of HIT-T15, RINm5F and 1.1B4 cells by IH
was significantly increased, whereas apoptosis of these cells was unchanged.
Real-time RT-PCR revealed that the mRNA levels of Reg family genes, IL-6, a
typical Reg family gene inducer, and HGF, an inhibitor of high-concentration of
Reg protein-induced apoptosis, were increased in IH-treated cells. In addition,
siRNAs against rat Reg family genes except for PAP I/Reg 2 attenuated IH-induced 
β cell proliferation.
SIGNIFICANCE: IH stress stimulates pancreatic β cell to induce IL-6 gene
expression. By the IL-6 stimulation, β cells over-express Reg family genes as
well as HGF gene. Reg family proteins stimulate β cell proliferation and HGF
inhibits apoptosis of β cells. As a result, β cell numbers are increased by IH.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Sleep Med. 2013 Nov;14(11):1139-50. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.07.006. Epub 2013
Aug 14.

Effects of continuous positive airway pressure therapy on systemic inflammation
in obstructive sleep apnea: a meta-analysis.

Xie X(1), Pan L, Ren D, Du C, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Affiliated Xuzhou
Hospital of Medical College of Southeast University, Xuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVES: Our meta-analysis was performed to estimate the effect of continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy on systemic inflammation in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
METHODS: A comprehensive literature search of PubMed and EMBASE was performed for
literature published up to January 2013. Standardized mean difference (SMD) was
calculated to estimate the treatment effects of pre- and post-CPAP therapy.
RESULTS: A total of 35 studies involving 1985 OSA patients were included in the
meta-analysis. Each study investigated one or more inflammatory markers: 24
studies on C-reactive protein (CRP), 16 studies on IL-6, 3 studies on IL-8, and
12 studies on tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α). The results showed that the SMD
(95% confidence interval [CI]) for CRP, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α were 0.452 (95% CI,
0.252-0.651), 0.299 (95% CI, 0.001-0.596), 0.645 (95% CI, 0.362-0.929), and 0.478
(95% CI, 0.219-0.736) in pre- and post-CPAP therapy, respectively. The subgroup
analyses seemed to support better benefits with therapy duration of ≥3 months and
more adequate compliance (≥4 h/night).
CONCLUSIONS: CPAP therapy could partially suppress systemic inflammation in OSA
patients, and substantial differences were present among the various inflammatory
markers.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24054505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. BMC Immunol. 2013 Sep 17;14:41. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-41.

Alveolar macrophages of GM-CSF knockout mice exhibit mixed M1 and M2 phenotypes.

Dalrymple H(1), Barna BP, Malur A, Malur AG, Kavuru MS, Thomassen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Lung Cell Biology and Translational Research, Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine and Sleep Medicine, East Carolina University,
Brody School of Medicine, 3E-149 Brody Medical Sciences Building, Greenville, NC 
27834, USA. thomassenm@ecu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Activin A is a pleiotrophic regulatory cytokine, the ablation of
which is neonatal lethal. Healthy human alveolar macrophages (AMs) constitutively
express activin A, but AMs of patients with pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) 
are deficient in activin A. PAP is an autoimmune lung disease characterized by
neutralizing autoantibodies to Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony Stimulating Factor
(GM-CSF). Activin A can be stimulated, however, by GM-CSF treatment of AMs in
vitro. To further explore pulmonary activin A regulation, we examined AMs in
bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) from wild-type C57BL/6 compared to GM-CSF knockout
mice which exhibit a PAP-like histopathology. Both human PAP and mouse GM-CSF
knockout AMs are deficient in the transcription factor, peroxisome proliferator
activated receptor gamma (PPARγ).
RESULTS: In sharp contrast to human PAP, activin A mRNA was elevated in mouse
GM-CSF knockout AMs, and activin A protein was increased in BAL fluid.
Investigation of potential causative factors for activin A upregulation revealed 
intrinsic overexpression of IFNγ, a potent inducer of the M1 macrophage
phenotype, in GM-CSF knockout BAL cells. IFNγ mRNA was not elevated in PAP BAL
cells. In vitro studies confirmed that IFNγ stimulated activin A in wild-type AMs
while antibody to IFNγ reduced activin A in GM-CSF knockout AMs. Both IFNγ and
Activin A were also reduced in GM-CSF knockout mice in vivo after intratracheal
instillation of lentivirus-PPARγ compared to control lentivirus vector.
Examination of other M1 markers in GM-CSF knockout mice indicated intrinsic
elevation of the IFNγ-regulated gene, inducible Nitrogen Oxide Synthetase (iNOS),
CCL5, and interleukin (IL)-6 compared to wild-type. The M2 markers, IL-10 and
CCL2 were also intrinsically elevated.
CONCLUSIONS: Data point to IFNγ as the primary upregulator of activin A in GM-CSF
knockout mice which in addition, exhibit a unique mix of M1-M2 macrophage
phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3848434
PMID: 24044676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Eur J Oncol Nurs. 2014 Feb;18(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejon.2013.08.004. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

Associations between cytokine gene variations and self-reported sleep disturbance
in women following breast cancer surgery.

Alfaro E(1), Dhruva A(2), Langford DJ(1), Koetters T(1), Merriman JD(1), West
C(1), Dunn LB(2), Paul SM(1), Cooper B(1), Cataldo J(1), Hamolsky D(1), Elboim
C(3), Kober K(1), Aouizerat BE(4), Miaskowski C(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (2)School
of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Redwood
Regional Medical Group, Santa Rosa, CA, USA. (4)School of Nursing, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Institute for Human Genetics, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA. (5)School of Nursing, University of
California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address:
chris.miaskowski@nursing.ucsf.edu.

PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH: To attempt to replicate the associations found in our
previous study of patients and family caregivers between interleukin 6 (IL6) and 
nuclear factor kappa beta 2 (NFKB2) and sleep disturbance and to identify
additional genetic associations in a larger sample of patients with breast
cancer.
METHODS AND SAMPLE: Patients with breast cancer (n = 398) were recruited prior to
surgery and followed for six months. Patients completed a self-report measure of 
sleep disturbance and provided a blood sample for genomic analyses. Growth
mixture modeling was used to identify distinct latent classes of patients with
higher and lower levels of sleep disturbance.
KEY RESULTS: Patients who were younger and who had higher comorbidity and lower
functional status were more likely to be in the high sustained sleep disturbance 
class. Variations in three cytokine genes (i.e., IL1 receptor 2 (IL1R2), IL13,
NFKB2) predicted latent class membership.
CONCLUSIONS: Polymorphisms in cytokine genes may partially explain
inter-individual variability in sleep disturbance. Determination of high risk
phenotypes and associated molecular markers may allow for earlier identification 
of patients at higher risk for developing sleep disturbance and lead to the
development of more targeted clinical interventions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3946647
PMID: 24012192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014 Feb;114(2):202-9. doi: 10.1111/bcpt.12129.
Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Resveratrol attenuates the release of inflammatory cytokines from human bronchial
smooth muscle cells exposed to lipoteichoic acid in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.

Knobloch J(1), Wahl C, Feldmann M, Jungck D, Strauch J, Stoelben E, Koch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III for Pneumology, Allergology, Sleep- and
Respiratory Medicine, University Hospital Bergmannsheil, Bochum, Germany.

During bacterial infections, pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
induce cytokine/chemokine release in immunoactive cells. This increases
corticosteroid-resistant airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and leads to exacerbations. Anti-inflammatory therapies other than
corticosteroids are required and resveratrol is currently under discussion.
Resveratrol is an activator of sirtuins, which are class III histone deacetylases
(HDACs). We suggested that human airway smooth muscle cells (HASMCs) release
COPD-associated cytokines/chemokines in response to lipoteichoic acid (LTA), a
major PAMP of gram-positive bacteria and that resveratrol is superior to the
corticosteroid dexamethasone in suppressing these cytokines/chemokines.
Cultivated HASMCs of patients with COPD were pre-incubated with resveratrol or
dexamethasone before stimulation with LTA. CCL2, GM-CSF, IL-6 and IL-8 were
analysed in culture supernatants by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Drug
effects were investigated in the absence and presence of trichostatin A (TSA), an
inhibitor of class I/II HDACs, and EX527, an inhibitor of the sirtuin SIRT1. LTA 
induced robust cytokine/chemokine release. Resveratrol was superior to
dexamethasone in reducing CCL-2, IL-6 and IL-8 in LTA-exposed HASMCs of patients 
with COPD. Both drugs were equally effective in reducing GM-CSF. Resveratrol
effects were partially reversed by EX527 but not by TSA. Dexamethasone effects
were partially reversed by TSA but not by EX527. We conclude that HASMCs
contribute to the increase in airway inflammation in COPD exacerbations caused by
gram-positive bacterial infections. Our data suggest resveratrol as an
alternative anti-inflammatory therapy in infection-induced COPD exacerbations.
Resveratrol and corticosteroids suppress cytokine/chemokine expression through
activation of SIRT1 or interaction with class I/II HDACs, respectively, in
HASMCs.

© 2013 Nordic Pharmacological Society. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23981542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Dec 2;47:69-76. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.08.004. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Sputum interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α and Salivary cortisol as new
biomarkers of depression in lung cancer patients.

Du YJ(1), Zhang HY, Li B, Wu X, Lv YB, Jin HL, Cao YX, Sun J, Luo QL, Gong WY,
Liu BJ, Wu JF, Shi SX, Dong JC.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Integrative Medicine for Lung, Inflammation and Cancers, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

Depression is common among lung cancer patients. Increasing evidence has
suggested that hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and pro-inflammatory
cytokines may play a key role in the pathophysiology of depression as well as
cancer. This pilot study investigated the efficacy of sputum interleukin (IL)-6, 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α and salivary cortisol as new markers to support the
diagnosis of depression in lung cancer patients. The diurnal rhythms of sputum
IL-6, sputum TNF-α and salivary cortisol were measured in lung cancer patients
with and without depression as well as depressed controls and healthy controls.
The area under the diurnal variation curves (AUC) over the 24h time course and
relative diurnal variation (VAR) were calculated. Receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) analysis was performed. Patients with co-morbid depression
and lung cancer showed highest level of sputum IL-6 AUC, sputum TNF-α AUC and
lowest level of cortisol VAR (P<0.001). As a biomarker for depression, salivary
cortisol VAR demonstrated an optimal cutoff point at 77.8% (AUC=0.94; 95% CI,
0.85-0.98), which is associated with a sensitivity of 82.1% and a specificity of 
96.0%. Sputum IL-6 AUC demonstrated a sensitivity of 74.4% and a specificity of
92.0% (AUC=0.81; 95% CI, 0.69-0.90). These findings suggested that higher 24h
overall levels of sputum IL-6, TNF-α and flattened diurnal salivary cortisol
slopes were associated with depression in lung cancer patients. Sputum IL-6 AUC
and salivary cortisol VAR performed best as biomarkers in the diagnosis of
depression in lung cancer patients.

© 2013.

PMID: 23969030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct 1;305(7):E890-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00301.2013. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Effects of recovery sleep after one work week of mild sleep restriction on
interleukin-6 and cortisol secretion and daytime sleepiness and performance.

Pejovic S(1), Basta M, Vgontzas AN, Kritikou I, Shaffer ML, Tsaoussoglou M,
Stiffler D, Stefanakis Z, Bixler EO, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania
State University, College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania;

One workweek of mild sleep restriction adversely impacts sleepiness, performance,
and proinflammatory cytokines. Many individuals try to overcome these adverse
effects by extending their sleep on weekends. To assess whether extended recovery
sleep reverses the effects of mild sleep restriction on sleepiness/alertness,
inflammation, and stress hormones, 30 healthy young men and women (mean age ± SD,
24.7 ± 3.5 yr; mean body mass index ± SD, 23.6 ± 2.4 kg/m(2)) participated in a
sleep laboratory experiment of 13 nights [4 baseline nights (8 h/night), followed
by 6 sleep restriction nights (6 h/night) and 3 recovery nights (10 h/night)].
Twenty-four-hour profiles of circulating IL-6 and cortisol, objective and
subjective daytime sleepiness (Multiple Sleep Latency Test and Stanford
Sleepiness Scale), and performance (Psychomotor Vigilance Task) were assessed on 
days 4 (baseline), 10 (after 1 wk of sleep restriction), and 13 (after 2 nights
of recovery sleep). Serial 24-h IL-6 plasma levels increased significantly during
sleep restriction and returned to baseline after recovery sleep. Serial 24-h
cortisol levels during restriction did not change compared with baseline, but
after recovery they were significantly lower. Subjective and objective sleepiness
increased significantly after restriction and returned to baseline after
recovery. In contrast, performance deteriorated significantly after restriction
and did not improve after recovery. Extended recovery sleep over the weekend
reverses the impact of one work week of mild sleep restriction on daytime
sleepiness, fatigue, and IL-6 levels, reduces cortisol levels, but does not
correct performance deficits. The long-term effects of a repeated sleep
restriction/sleep recovery weekly cycle in humans remain unknown.

PMCID: PMC3798707
PMID: 23941878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2013 May;34(203):247-50.

[Monoclonal antibodies from neurological and neuropsychological perspective].

[Article in Polish]

Piusińska-Macoch R.

The role of monoclonal antibodies and other proinflammatory cytokines in the
regulatory processes of the central and peripheral nervous system is not yet
fully understood. Clinical studies show that they are involved in the
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease or other
neurodegenerative disabilities with cognitive impairments. Genetic basis of these
disorders is still in research. In the past few years it has been shown that
increased levels of TNF-alpha and IL-6 in plasma play role in patients with
ischemic stroke in the acute phase as well as transient ischemic episodes. Also
the negative impact of TNF-alpha has been demonstrated on neck and coronary
vessels, including the composition of plaques in the carotid arteries. A few
reports indicate the involvement of tumor necrosis factor in such complex
processes such as emotions, behavior or personality. Recent studies point to the 
important role of proinflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of sleep
disorders such as narcolepsy, cataplexy and sleep paralysis. TNF-alpha can also
activate nociceptive pathways, causing the intensity of neuropathic pain. However
discloses asymmetric subtypes share TNF-1, TNF-2 in the induction and the
maintenance of pain. The phenomenon of complex neurohormonal control mechanism
support the proinflammatory cytokines is not fully understood and needs further
empirical verification.

PMID: 23894773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Nov;34:43-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.06.005. Epub 2013
Jun 29.

Subjective health perception in healthy young men changes in response to
experimentally restricted sleep and subsequent recovery sleep.

Lekander M(1), Andreasson AN, Kecklund G, Ekman R, Ingre M, Akerstedt T, Axelsson
J.

Author information: 
(1)Stress Research Institute, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden; Osher
Center for Integrative Medicine and Division of Psychology, Department of
Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic
address: Mats.Lekander@ki.se.

Sleep and subjective health are both prospectively related to objective indices
of health and health care use. Here, we tested whether five days with restricted 
sleep and subsequent recovery days affect subjective health and is related to
increased levels of circulating IL-6 and TNF-α and fatigue. Nine healthy men
(23-28 ears) went through a 6-week sleep protocol with subjects as their own
controls in a repeated measures design with a total of 11 nights in a sleep
laboratory. The experimental part of the protocol included three baseline days
(sleep 23-07 h), five days with sleep restriction (03-07 h) and three recovery
days (23-07 h) in the sleep laboratory. Subjective health and fatigue was
recorded daily. Eight blood samples were drawn each day (every third hour) on 8
days of the protocol and analyzed with respect to IL-6 and TNF-α. Subjective
health deteriorated gradually during restricted sleep (p=.002) and returned to
baseline levels after three days of recovery. IL-6 and TNF-α did not change
significantly. Fatigue increased gradually during sleep restriction (p=.001),
which significantly contributed to the association between restricted sleep and
subjective health. The study is the first to show that subjective health is
directly responsive to changes in sleep length and related to increased fatigue. 
Thus, subjective health is differently appraised after manipulation of one of its
presumed determinants. Larger experimental studies would be beneficial to further
distinguish causation from association regarding the underpinnings of subjective 
health.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23820239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Epidemiol. 2013 Sep 15;178(6):956-61. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwt072. Epub 2013 Jun
25.

Associations between change in sleep duration and inflammation: findings on
C-reactive protein and interleukin 6 in the Whitehall II Study.

Ferrie JE, Kivimäki M, Akbaraly TN, Singh-Manoux A, Miller MA, Gimeno D, Kumari
M, Davey Smith G, Shipley MJ.

Cross-sectional evidence suggests associations between sleep duration and levels 
of the inflammatory markers, C-reactive protein and interleukin-6. This
longitudinal study uses data from the London-based Whitehall II study to examine 
whether changes in sleep duration are associated with average levels of
inflammation from 2 measures 5 years apart. Sleep duration (≤5, 6, 7, 8, ≥9 hours
on an average week night) was assessed in 5,003 middle-aged women and men in
1991/1994 and 1997/1999. Fasting levels of C-reactive protein and interleukin-6
were measured in 1997/1999 and 2002/2004. Cross-sectional analyses indicated that
shorter sleep is associated with higher levels of inflammatory markers.
Longitudinal analyses showed that each hour per night decrease in sleep duration 
between 1991/1994 and 1997/1999 was associated with higher levels of C-reactive
protein (8.1%) and interleukin-6 (4.5%) averaged across measures in 1997/1999 and
2002/2004. Adjustment for longstanding illness and major cardiometabolic risk
factors indicated that disease processes may partially underlie these
associations. An increase in sleep duration was not associated with average
levels of inflammatory markers. These results suggest that both short sleep and
reductions in sleep are associated with average levels of inflammation over a
5-year period.

PMCID: PMC3817449
PMID: 23801012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Inflammation. 2013 Dec;36(6):1344-7. doi: 10.1007/s10753-013-9673-4.

Serum cardiotrophin-1 and IL-6 levels in patients with obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome.

Kurt OK(1), Tosun M, Talay F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chest Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, Abant Izzet Baysal
University, 14280, Bolu, Turkey, okarkurt@gmail.com.

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is associated with increased rates of
cardiovascular diseases (CVD). Basic mechanisms involved in the increased
cardiovascular risk of OSAS remain unclear. Inflammation has been shown to
potentially play a critical role in this association. The aim of the present
study was to investigate the level of cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) in patients with
OSAS. Forty-eight newly diagnosed OSAS patients and 37 nonapneic controls were
enrolled in this study. Demographic data, cigarette smoking status, previous
history of chronic diseases including CVD and metabolic diseases and drugs, and
habits were obtained by a standardized questionnaire. All patients underwent
polysomnographic evaluation. The mean age was 48.3 ± 12.3 (24-74) years in OSAS
group. Median apnea-hypopnea index was 23.6 (6-91.8) and median body mass index
was 30.4 (24.2-49.4) in the OSAS group. Plasma CT-1 levels in OSAS and control
groups, respectively, were 12.03 ± 1.08 and 11.85 ± 1.18 pg/ml. There was no
significant difference in the plasma levels of CT-1 and IL-6 between the OSAS
group and the controls.

PMID: 23783568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Psychiatr Res. 2013 Sep;47(9):1228-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.05.004.
Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Gender differences in the prospective associations of self-reported sleep quality
with biomarkers of systemic inflammation and coagulation: findings from the Heart
and Soul Study.

Prather AA(1), Epel ES, Cohen BE, Neylan TC, Whooley MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, 3333 California St., Suite
465, San Francisco, CA 94118, United States. prathera@chc.ucsf.edu

Systemic inflammation is proposed as a putative mechanism underlying the link
between poor sleep and cardiovascular disease. The aim of present study was to
investigate the cross-sectional and prospective associations of self-reported
sleep quality with biomarkers of inflammation and coagulation implicated in
coronary heart disease (CHD) and to explore whether these associations differed
between men and women. To this end, measures of sleep quality and markers of
inflammation, including circulating levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6),
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP), and fibrinogen were assessed at
baseline in 980 participants with established CHD and 626 at 5-year follow-up. In
the sample as a whole, subjective sleep quality was unrelated to inflammatory
markers in cross-sectional and prospective analyses. However, in gender
stratified analyses, adjusting for age, ethnicity, education, body mass index,
and regular snoring, poorer subjective sleep quality at baseline was
prospectively associated with 5-year increases in IL-6 (b = 0.14, SE = 0.05,
p = 0.003), CRP (b = 0.21, SE = 0.09, p = 0.02), and fibrinogen (b = 18.02,
SE = 7.62, p = 0.02) in women but not men. These associations remained
independent of lifestyle/psychosocial factors, medical comorbidities, medication 
use, and cardiac function. Women who reported baseline sleep disturbances
characterized by a tendency to wake up too early in the morning also showed
significant 5-year increases in circulating IL-6 that withstood covariate
adjustment. Further research is necessary to elucidate the pathways that underlie
gender-specific associations between subjective sleep quality and markers of
inflammation and coagulation as this may help clarify gender disparities in CHD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3864775
PMID: 23746737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Tuberc Lung Dis. 2013 Jul;17(7):922-7. doi: 10.5588/ijtld.12.0610.

Elevated IP-10 and IL-6 from bronchoalveolar lavage cells are biomarkers of
non-cavitary tuberculosis.

Nolan A(1), Condos R, Huie ML, Dawson R, Dheda K, Bateman E, Rom WN, Weiden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, New York University 
School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

BACKGROUND: Active TB disease can destroy lung parenchyma leading to cavities.
Immune responses that predispose or protect individuals from lung damage during
TB are poorly defined.
OBJECTIVE: To sample lung immune cells and assay bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
cell cytokine production.
DESIGN: Enrolled subjects (n = 73) had bilateral infiltrates and underwent BAL.
RESULTS: All had sputum culture demonstrating Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
22/73 (30%) had cavities on their chest radiograph. Those with cavities at
presentation had a higher percentage of polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMN) in
BAL as well as lower inducible protein (IP) 10 (P < 0.01) and interleukin (IL) 6 
(P = 0.013) in BAL cell supernatants compared to those without cavities. There
was no correlation between cavities and other BAL or serum cytokines. IP-10 was
negatively associated with BAL PMN. IP-10 and IL-6 expression above median
reduces the odds of cavities by 79% and 78% in logistic regression models. IP-10 
and IL-6 clustered with interferon-gamma and tumour necrosis factor-alpha in a
principal component analysis, while IL-4 clustered with PMN.
CONCLUSION: Increasing IP-10 and IL-6 production by BAL cells is associated with 
non-cavitary TB in patients who present with radiographically advanced TB. IP-10 
and IL-6 may reflect an effective T-helper 1 immune control pathway for TB,
attenuating tuberculous lung destruction.

PMCID: PMC4050635
PMID: 23743311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2013 Apr;21(4):698-704. doi: 10.1002/oby.20115.

Sleep apnea modifies the long-term impact of surgically induced weight loss on
cardiac function and inflammation.

Kardassis D(1), Grote L, Sjöström L, Hedner J, Karason K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital and Sahlgrenska
Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. dkardassis@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Obesity is frequently associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
Both conditions are proinflammatory and proposed to deteriorate cardiac function.
We used a nested cohort study design to evaluate the long-term impact of
bariatric surgery on OSA and how weight loss and OSA relate to inflammation and
cardiac performance.
DESIGN AND METHODS: At 10-year follow-up in the Swedish Obese Subjects (SOS)
study, we identified 19 obese subjects (BMI 31.2 ± 5.3 kg m(-2) ), who following 
bariatric surgery at SOS-baseline had displayed sustained weight losses (surgery 
group), and 20 obese controls (BMI 42.0 ± 6.2 kg m(-2) ), who during the same
time-period had maintained stable weight (control group). All study participants 
underwent overnight polysomnography examination, echocardiography and analysis of
inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: The surgery group displayed a lower apnea hypopnea index (AHI) (19.9 ±
21.5 vs. 37.8 ± 27.7 n/h, P = 0.013), lower inflammatory activity (hsCRP 2.3 ±
3.0 vs. 7.2 ± 5.0 mg L(-1) , P < 0.001), reduced left ventricular mass (165 ± 22 
vs. 207 ± 22 g, P < 0.001) and superior left ventricular diastolic function (E/A 
ratio 1.24 ± 1.10 vs. 1.05 ± 0.20, P = 0.006) as compared with weight stable
obese controls. In multiple regression analyses including all subjects (n = 39)
and controlling for BMI, the AHI remained independently associated with hsCRP (β 
= 0.09, P < 0.001), TNF-α (β = 0.03, P = 0.031), IL-6 (β = 0.01, P = 0.007), IL
10 (β = -0.06; P = 0.018), left ventricular mass (β = 0.64, P < 0.001), left
atrial area (β = 0.08, P = 0.002), pulmonary artery pressure (β = 0.08, P =
0.011) and E/Ea ratio (β = 0.04, P = 0.021).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with sustained weight loss after bariatric surgery display 
less severe sleep apnea, reduced inflammatory activity, and enhanced cardiac
function. Persisting sleep apnea appears to limit the beneficial effect of weight
loss on inflammation and cardiac performance.

Copyright © 2012 The Obesity Society.

PMID: 23712972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nature. 2013 May 23;497(7450):S6-7. doi: 10.1038/497S6a.

Deprivation: a wake-up call.

Dolgin E.

PMID: 23698507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Musculoskeletal Care. 2013 Sep;11(3):179-85. doi: 10.1002/msc.1052. Epub 2013 May
20.

Using actigraphy to measure sleep patterns in rheumatoid arthritis: a pilot study
in patients taking night-time prednisone.

Clarke LL(1), Wilson S, Kirwan JR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bristol Academic Rheumatology Unit, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Bristol, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Poor sleep quality is a commonly reported but under-investigated
consequence of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Actigraphy is a non-invasive way of
measuring sleep, estimated from the frequency and intensity of physical movement 
at the wrist. We used actigraphy to measure sleep parameters compared with sleep 
questionnaire data, and assessed the practicality of actigraph use in patients
with RA.
METHODS: In a pilot study of actigraphy conducted within an investigation of
night-time prednisone treatment and circadian interleukin-6 concentrations in ten
patients with active RA, we compared actigraphy with the St Mary's Hospital Sleep
Questionnaire and assessed whether night-time administration of prednisone
resulted in increased sleep disturbance.
RESULTS: The actigraph watch was well tolerated by our patients, producing
adequate data for analysis for 128 out of 133 test days (96.2%). The results
indicated reasonable concordance between actigraph and sleep questionnaire data
in the present sample. Patient satisfaction with sleep (question 11) strongly
correlated with sleep efficiency measured by the actigraph (r = 0.71, p = 0.22)
and showed a trend for inverse correlation with the fragmentation index
(r = -0.60, p = 0.067). Quality of sleep (question 9) correlated
non-significantly with the fragmentation index (r = -0.59, p = 0.072). We were
unable to identify any significant correlations between clinical measures of
disease and sleep parameters in this sample. There were no apparent detrimental
consequences of the night-time dose of prednisone on the measures of sleep
quality and quantity.
CONCLUSION: In spite of the physical disability imposed by RA, the actigraph was 
well tolerated and gave a useful measure of sleep in patients with active
disease. It has the potential for use in larger controlled trials.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3787780
PMID: 23695990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mediators Inflamm. 2013;2013:279365. doi: 10.1155/2013/279365. Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Can high altitude influence cytokines and sleep?

Lemos Vde A(1), dos Santos RV, Lira FS, Rodrigues B, Tufik S, de Mello MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Campus São Paulo, UNIFESP, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil. aquino.lemos@terra.com.br

The number of persons who relocate to regions of high altitude for work,
pleasure, sport, or residence increases every year. It is known that the reduced 
supply of oxygen (O2) induced by acute or chronic increases in altitude
stimulates the body to adapt to new metabolic challenges imposed by hypoxia.
Sleep can suffer partial fragmentation because of the exposure to high altitudes,
and these changes have been described as one of the responsible factors for the
many consequences at high altitudes. We conducted a review of the literature
during the period from 1987 to 2012. This work explored the relationships among
inflammation, hypoxia and sleep in the period of adaptation and examined a novel 
mechanism that might explain the harmful effects of altitude on sleep, involving 
increased Interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 β ), Interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF- α ) production from several tissues and cells, such as
leukocytes and cells from skeletal muscle and brain.

PMCID: PMC3649750
PMID: 23690660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Chin J Integr Med. 2013 May;19(5):394-400. doi: 10.1007/s11655-013-1459-x. Epub
2013 May 15.

Chronic intermittent hypoxia and hypertension: a review of systemic inflammation 
and Chinese medicine.

Wu CX(1), Liu Y, Zhang JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Disease, Xiyuan Hospital, China Academy of
Chinese Medical Sciences, Beijing 100091, China.

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) and hypertension commonly coexist.
Clinical studies indicate that OSAS plays a key role in increasing the risk of
prevalent hypertension. Chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH) is the core
pathological mechanism of OSAS, and has a close relationship with systemic
inflammation. Growing evidence shows that CIH and hypertension are strongly
related, involving markers or pathways indicative of systemic inflammation, such 
as high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), interleukin-6, nuclear
factor-kappa B, tumor necrosis factor-α, interleukin-8 and p38 mitogen-activated 
protein kinase (MAPK)-dependent pathways. Oxidative stress also plays an
important role in this process, including in the activation of polymorphonuclear 
neutrophils. However, the pathophysiological and clinical significance of
systemic inflammation in CIH and hypertension is not proven. This review article 
highlights the relationship between CIH and hypertension through systemic
inflammation and the current interventions available in Chinese medicine, to
offer a background for the future treatment of OSAS-related hypertension with
integrative medicine.

PMID: 23674113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Gene. 2013 Sep 15;527(1):62-4. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.020. Epub 2013 May 2.

Association between fibromyalgia syndrome and polymorphism of the IL-4 gene in a 
Turkish population.

Yigit S(1), Inanir A, Tekcan A, Inanir S, Tural S, Ates O.

Author information: 
(1)Gaziosmanpasa University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 
Tokat, Turkey. yigit.serbulent@gmail.com

PURPOSE: Fibromyalgia (FM) syndrome is a form of non-articular rheumatism
characterized by long term and widespread musculoskeletal pain, morning
stiffness, sleep disturbance, paresthesia, and pressure hyperalgesia at
characteristic sites, called soft tissue tender points. The etiology of FM is
still obscure. Genetic factors may predispose individuals to FM. Cytokines may
play a role in the pathophysiology of FM. The aim of this study was to
investigate the interleukin-4 (IL-4) 70 bp VNTR variations in Turkish patients
with FM and evaluate if there was an association with clinical features,
especially between these polymorphisms.
METHODS: The study included 300 patients with FM and 270 healthy controls.
Genomic DNA was isolated and genotyped using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for 
the IL-4 gene 70 bp VNTR polymorphisms.
RESULTS: There was statistically significant difference between the groups with
respect to IL-4 genotype distribution and allele frequencies (p<0.0001). The
homozygous P1P1 genotype and P1 allele were significantly higher in FM patients
than in healthy controls (p=0.04; OR: 3.25, 95% CI: 1-10, p<0.0001; OR:4.84, 95% 
CI:3-7.7). There was not any difference between the groups respect to IL-4
genotype distribution and allele frequencies (p>0.05) and clinical
characteristics.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that there is an association of IL-4 gene 70 bp 
VNTR polymorphism with susceptibility of a person for development of FM. As a
result, further studies are necessary to determine whether IL-4 may be a genetic 
marker for FM in the Turkish population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23644020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e61016. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061016. Print 2013.

Cross-translational studies in human and Drosophila identify markers of sleep
loss.

Thimgan MS(1), Gottschalk L, Toedebusch C, McLeland J, Rechtschaffen A,
Gilliland-Roberts M, Duntley SP, Shaw PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Inadequate sleep has become endemic, which imposes a substantial burden for
public health and safety. At present, there are no objective tests to determine
if an individual has gone without sleep for an extended period of time. Here we
describe a novel approach that takes advantage of the evolutionary conservation
of sleep to identify markers of sleep loss. To begin, we demonstrate that IL-6 is
increased in rats following chronic total sleep deprivation and in humans
following 30 h of waking. Discovery experiments were then conducted on saliva
taken from sleep-deprived human subjects to identify candidate markers. Given the
relationship between sleep and immunity, we used Human Inflammation Low Density
Arrays to screen saliva for novel markers of sleep deprivation. Integrin αM
(ITGAM) and Anaxin A3 (AnxA3) were significantly elevated following 30 h of sleep
loss. To confirm these results, we used QPCR to evaluate ITGAM and AnxA3 in
independent samples collected after 24 h of waking; both transcripts were
increased. The behavior of these markers was then evaluated further using the
power of Drosophila genetics as a cost-effective means to determine whether the
marker is associated with vulnerability to sleep loss or other confounding
factors (e.g., stress). Transcript profiling in flies indicated that the
Drosophila homologues of ITGAM were not predictive of sleep loss. Thus, we
examined transcript levels of additional members of the integrin family in flies.
Only transcript levels of scab, the Drosophila homologue of Integrin α5 (ITGA5), 
were associated with vulnerability to extended waking. Since ITGA5 was not
included on the Low Density Array, we returned to human samples and found that
ITGA5 transcript levels were increased following sleep deprivation. These
cross-translational data indicate that fly and human discovery experiments are
mutually reinforcing and can be used interchangeably to identify candidate
biomarkers of sleep loss.

PMCID: PMC3634862
PMID: 23637783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013 Dec;79(6):892-8. doi: 10.1111/cen.12233. Epub 2013
Jun 3.

Random measurements of adiponectin and IL-6 may not be indicative of the 24-h
profile in critically ill patients.

Robinson K(1), Jones M, Ordonez J, Grice J, Davidson B, Prins J, Venkatesh B.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, The Wesley Hospital, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.

CONTEXT: The anti-inflammatory role of adiponectin has prompted interest in a
potential role in acute inflammatory conditions associated with critical illness.
It is unclear whether a random adiponectin measurement adequately reflects the
24-h profile in critically ill patients.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the temporal profile of total and high molecular weight
(HMW) adiponectin and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in 15 critically ill patients.
DESIGN: A prospective, observational study.
SETTING: Level II intensive care unit in a metropolitan hospital.
PATIENTS OR OTHER PARTICIPANTS: Fifteen critically ill patients expected to stay 
in the ICU for longer than 48 h were eligible for enrolment.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Serial, hourly measurements of total and HMW adiponectin
and IL-6.
RESULTS: Over a 24-h period, total and HMW adiponectin display considerable
within-patient variability (coefficient of variation 34% and 87% respectively)
and show no trend over time. Averaging 2 or 3 continuous measures reduced
within-patient variability of both total and HMW adiponectin by up to 50%
compared to one measure. There was a negative correlation between serum glucose
and adiponectin (total P = 0·016, HMW P = 0·039). No relationship existed between
adiponectin and IL-6 (total P = 0·62, HMW P = 0·35).
CONCLUSIONS: Marked within-patient, hourly variability in total and HMW
adiponectin is evident in critically ill patients. A random measurement may not
be reflective of the 24-h profile in these patients. A negative correlation
exists between adiponectin and blood glucose levels and a positive correlation
between adiponectin and oxygen saturation. No clear relationship exists between
adiponectin and IL-6.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23634964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Sleep. 2013 May 1;36(5):763-768C. doi: 10.5665/sleep.2644.

Vascular inflammation and sleep disordered breathing in a community-based cohort.

Chami HA(1), Fontes JD, Vasan RS, Keaney JF Jr, O'Connor GT, Larson MG, Benjamin 
EJ, Gottlieb DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
hchami@aub.edu.lb

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Sleep disordered breathing is associated with cardiovascular
disease. The pathophysiologic mechanisms remain unclear, but enhanced vascular
inflammation is implicated. We sought to evaluate the association of sleep
disordered breathing with biomarkers of inflammation.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional, observational.
SETTING: Community-based.
PARTICIPANTS: There were 900 participants from the Framingham Heart Study site of
the Sleep Heart Health Study (52% females, mean age 60 y, 23% ethnic minorities).
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS: We assessed circulating levels of nine inflammatory biomarkers in
relation to polysomnographically-derived apnea-hypopnea index and hypoxemia index
(% sleep time with oxyhemoglobin saturation < 90%). Multivariable models were
adjusted for demographics, smoking, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and other 
potential confounders, without and with adjustment for body mass index.
RESULTS: With multivariable adjustment not including body mass index, the
apnea-hypopnea index was associated with C-reactive protein, inter-leukin-6,
fibrinogen, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and P-selectin levels and
hypoxemia index was associated with C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and
fibrinogen levels. After adjustment for body mass index, only the association of 
interleukin-6 with sleep disordered breathing remained significant: the adjusted 
mean serum interleukin-6 level was 2.93, 3.14, 3.34, and 4.62 pg/mL,
respectively, in participants with apnea-hypopnea index < 5, 5-14.9, 15-29.9, and
≥ 30 events/h (P = 0.01 for trend) and 2.97, 3.01, 3.35, and 4.85 pg/mL,
respectively, in participants with hypoxemia index < 0.5, 0.5-4.9, 5-9.9, and ≥
10% of sleep time (P = 0.02 for trend).
CONCLUSIONS: In a community-based sample, sleep disordered breathing is
associated with higher levels of interleukin-6, a marker of myocardial infarction
risk and mortality. Adiposity may mediate the increased levels of C-reactive
protein, fibrinogen, intercellular adhesion molecule-1, and P-selectin observed
in sleep disordered breathing.

PMCID: PMC3622647
PMID: 23633759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Pharm Compd. 2013 Jan-Feb;17(1):74-85.

The effects of compounded bioidentical transdermal hormone therapy on hemostatic,
inflammatory, immune factors; cardiovascular biomarkers; quality-of-life
measures; and health outcomes in perimenopausal and postmenopausal women.

Stephenson K(1), Neuenschwander PF, Kurdowska AK.

Author information: 
(1)Women's Wellness Center, Tyler, Texas, USA. doctorkenna@aol.com

Menopause impacts 25 million women world wide each year, and the World Health
Organization estimates 1.2 billion women will be postmenopausal by 2030.
Menopause has been associated with symptoms of hot flashes, night sweats,
dysphoric mood, sleep disturbance, and conditions of cardiovascular disease,
depression, osteoporosis, osteoarthritis, depression, dementia, and frailty.
Conventional hormone replacement therapy results in increased thrombotic events, 
and an increased risk of breast cancer and dementia as evidenced in large
prospective clinical trials including Heart and Estrogen/Progestin Replacement
Study I and the Women's Health Initiative. A possible mechanism for these adverse
events is the unfavorable net effects of conjugated equine estrogens and
medroxyprogesterone acetate on the hemostatic balance and inflammatory and immune
factors. Physiologic sex steroid therapy with transdermal delivery for
peri/postmenopausal women may offer a different risk/benefit profile, yet
long-term studies of this treatment model are lacking. The objective of this
study was to examine the long-term effects of compounded bioidentical transdermal
sex steroid therapy including estriol, estradiol, progesterone, DHEA, and
testosterone on cardiovascular biomarkers, hemostatic, inflammatory, immune
signaling factors; quality-of-life measures; and health outcomes in
peri/postmenopausal women within the context of a hormone restoration model of
care. A prospective, cohort, closed-label study received approval from the Human 
Subjects Committee. Recruitment from outpatient clinics at an academic medical
center and the community at large resulted in three hundred women giving signed
consent. Seventy-five women who met strict inclusion/exclusion criteria were
enrolled. Baseline hormone evaluation was performed along with baseline
experimental measures. Following this, women received compounded transdermal
bioidentical hormone therapy of BiEst (80%Estriol/20%Estradiol), and/or
Progesterone for eight weeks to meet established physiologic reference ranges for
the luteal phase in premenopausal women. The luteal phase hormone ratios were
selected based on animal and epidemiologic studies demonstrating favorable
outcomes related to traumatic, ischemic, or neuronal injury. Follow-up testing
was performed at eight weeks and adjustment to hormone regimens were made
including addition of androgens of DHEA and Testosterone if indicated.
Experimental subjects were monitored for 36 months. Baseline, 2-month, and annual
values were obtained for: blood pressure, body mass index, fasting glucose,
Homeostasis Metabolic Assessment of Insulin Resistance (HOMA-IR), fasting
triglycerides, total Factor VII, Factor VIII, fibrinogen, Antithrombin III,
Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor1(PAL-1), C-reactive protein (CRP), Interleukin-6 
(IL-6), Matrix Metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha (TNF),
Insulin-like Growth Factor (IGF-1), and sex steroid levels. Psychosocial measures
included: Greene Climacteric Scale, Visual Analog Pain Scale, Hamilton Anxiety
Scale, Hamilton Depression Scale, Holmes Rahe Stress Scale, Job Strain, and Home 
Strain. Health outcome measures included the number of prescribed medications
used, number of co-morbidities, and endometrial thickness in postmenopausal women
with intact uteri. Subjects receiving compounded transdermal bioidentical hormone
therapy showed significant favorable changes in: Greene Climacteric Scale scores,
Hamilton Anxiety Scale, Hamilton Depression Scale, Visual Analog Pain Scale,
fasting glucose, fasting triglycerides, MMP-9, C-reactive Protein, fibrinogen,
Factor VII, Factor VIII, Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1, and health outcomes of
co-morbidities and a number of prescribed medications. Antithrombin III levels
were significantly decreased at 36 months. All other measures did not exhibit
significant effects. Administration of compounded transdermal bioidentical
hormone therapy in doses targeted to physiologic reference ranges administered in
a daily dose significantly relieved menopausal symptoms in peri/postmenopausal
women. Cardiovascular biomarkers, inflammatory factors, immune signaling factors,
and health outcomes were favorably impacted, despite very high life stress, and
home and work strain in study subjects. The therapy did not adversely alter the
net prothrombotic potential, and there were no associated adverse events. This
model of care warrants consideration as an effective and safe clinical therapy
for peri/postmenopausal women especially in populations with high perceived
stress and a history of stressful life events prior to, or during the menopausal 
transition.

PMID: 23627249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Eur Respir J. 2014 Jan;43(1):145-55. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00126712. Epub 2013
Apr 18.

Sleep apnoea, sleepiness, inflammation and insulin resistance in middle-aged
males and females.

Kritikou I(1), Basta M, Vgontzas AN, Pejovic S, Liao D, Tsaoussoglou M, Bixler
EO, Stefanakis Z, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA.

In obese males obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is associated with inflammation and
insulin resistance; however, findings are confounded by adipose tissue, a
hormone- and cytokine-secreting organ. Our goal was to examine whether in a
relatively nonobese population, OSA is associated with sleepiness and
inflammation/insulin resistance, and to assess the effects of a 2-month
placebo-controlled continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) use. 77 subjects,
38 middle-aged males and post-menopausal females with OSA and 39 male and female 
controls, were studied in the sleep laboratory for 4 nights. Measures of
sleepiness (objective and subjective), performance, serial 24-h blood samples for
interleukin (IL)-6, tumour necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-1, leptin and
adiponectin, and single samples for high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP), 
fasting glucose and insulin levels were obtained. Apnoeic males were
significantly sleepier and had significantly higher hsCRP, IL-6, leptin and
insulin resistance than controls. Apnoeic females had significantly higher hsCRP;
however, objective sleepiness, IL-6, TNFR-1, insulin resistance (Homeostatic
Model Assessment index), leptin and adiponectin were similar to controls. CPAP
improved subjective sleepiness, but no changes were observed in any of the
biomarkers. In conclusion, OSA is associated with sleepiness, inflammation and
insulin resistance, even in nonobese males, and this association is stronger in
males than in females. Short-term CPAP does not improve the
inflammatory/metabolic aberrations in OSA.

PMID: 23598957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Med Sci Monit. 2013 Apr 8;19:251-6. doi: 10.12659/MSM.883874.

Plasma ghrelin and pro-inflammatory markers in patients with obstructive sleep
apnea and stable coronary heart disease.

Yang D(1), Liu Z, Luo Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardio-Vascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and
coronary heart disease (CHD). Ghrelin, a multifunctional hormone, may play a key 
role in patients with OSA and/or CHD. The aim of this study was to investigate
plasma ghrelin and pro-inflammatory cytokines in patients with OSA and /or CHD
and assess the association of these cytokines with ghrelin.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Plasma ghrelin, interleukin-6(IL-6) and tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-á) were measured in 75 patients and in 25 age-, sex-, and
BMI-matched healthy control subjects. These patients were further classified into
3 groups (25 with OSA, 25 with OSA and CHD, and 25 with CHD), matched for age,
sex, body mass index, and the severity of OSA or CHD.
RESULTS: Plasma ghrelin levels were increased, and TNF-á and IL-6 were decreased 
in OSA patients with and without CHD, when compared with controls with similar
CHD clinical characteristics (both P<0.05). Further, OSA patients with CHD tended
to have higher plasma levels of TNF-á and IL-6, and lower plasma levels of
ghrelin than OSA controls (P>0.05). Notably, plasma ghrelin levels were
independently negatively correlated with plasma TNF-á and IL-6 (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased plasma ghrelin levels might constitute an independent
determinant of decreased TNF-á and IL-6, suggesting that higher ghrelin level may
in part represent a compensatory mechanism to overcome the pro-inflammatory
effects of OSA. Further large-scale and prospective studies are needed to confirm
these effects.

PMCID: PMC3659155
PMID: 23567762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59808. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059808. Epub 2013 Mar 20.

Time-dependent effects of localized inflammation on peripheral clock gene
expression in rats.

Westfall S(1), Aguilar-Valles A, Mongrain V, Luheshi GN, Cermakian N.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada.

Many aspects of the immune system, including circulating cytokine levels as well 
as counts and function of various immune cell types, present circadian rhythms.
Notably, the mortality rate of animals subjected to high doses of
lipopolysaccharide is dependent on the time of treatment. In addition, the
severity of symptoms of various inflammatory conditions follows a daily rhythmic 
pattern. The mechanisms behind the crosstalk between the circadian and immune
systems remain elusive. Here we demonstrate that localized inflammation induced
by turpentine oil (TURP) causes a time-dependent induction of interleukin (IL)-6 
and has time-, gene- and tissue-specific effects on clock gene expression. More
precisely, TURP blunts the peak of Per1 and Per2 expression in the liver while in
other tissues, the expression nadir is elevated. In contrast, Rev-erbα expression
remains relatively unaffected by TURP treatment. Co-treatment with the
anti-inflammatory agent IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) did not alter the
response of Per2 to TURP treatment in liver, despite the reduced induction of
fever and IL-6 serum levels. This indicates that the TURP-mediated changes of
Per2 in the liver might be due to factors other than systemic IL-6 and fever.
Accordingly, IL-6 treatment had no effect on clock gene expression in HepG2 liver
carcinoma cells. Altogether, we show that localized inflammation causes
significant time-dependent changes in peripheral circadian clock gene expression,
via a mechanism likely involving mediators independent from IL-6 and fever.

PMCID: PMC3603876
PMID: 23527270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. BMC Psychiatry. 2013 Mar 5;13:75. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-13-75.

The effect of sunlight exposure on interleukin-6 levels in depressive and
non-depressive subjects.

Levandovski R(1), Pfaffenseller B, Carissimi A, Gama CS, Hidalgo MP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Cronobiologia do Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA),
da Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this epidemiological study was to evaluate the
effect of length of sunlight exposure on interleukin 6 (IL-6) levels in
depressive and non-depressive subjects.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study with 154 subjects (54 males, mean age: 
43.5 ± 12.8 years) who were living in a rural area in south Brazil.
Chronobiological and light parameters were assessed using the Munich Chronotype
Questionnaire. Sleep quality was evaluated using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index. Depressive symptoms were assessed with the Beck Depression Inventory.
Plasma levels of inflammatory cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis 
factor-α, and interferon) were collected during the daytime and measured.
RESULTS: IL-6 levels showed a positive correlation with light exposure (r =
0.257; p < 0.001) and a negative correlation with the mid-sleep phase on
work-free days (r = -0.177; p = 0.028). Multiple linear regression analysis
showed that only the length of light exposure was an independent factor for
predicting IL-6 levels (ß = 0.26; p = 0.002). In non-depressed subjects, exposure
to a different intensity of light did not affect IL-6 levels (t = -1.6; p = 0.1).
However, when the two depressive groups with low and high light exposure were
compared, the low light exposure group had lower levels of IL-6 compared with the
high light exposure group (t = -2.19 and p = 0.0037).
CONCLUSIONS: The amount of time that participants are exposed to sunlight is
directly related to their IL-6 levels. Additionally, depressed subjects differ in
their IL-6 levels if they are exposed to light for differing amounts of time.

PMCID: PMC3599872
PMID: 23497121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2013 May;77(5):690-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2013.01.019. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

The evaluation of adenotonsillectomy on TNF-α and IL-6 levels in obese children
with obstructive sleep apnea.

Chu L(1), Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Center, Chongqing Health Center for Women
and Children, Chongqing 400013, China.

OBJECTIVE: (1) To evaluate the effect of adenotonsillectomy (T&A) on clinical
signs in obese children with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA); (2) to evaluate the
changes in tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin (IL)-6 levels pre- and
post-surgery; and (3) to determine a potential explanation for changes in
cytokine levels after T&A therapy.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: In brief, 90 obese children with OSA were enrolled.
Polysomnographic data, such as an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) and oxyhemoglobin
saturation (SaO₂), and demographic information, such as body mass index (BMI),
were collected. TNF-α and IL-6 levels were determined before and 6 months after
T&A treatment.
RESULTS: It was observed that 61.1% of obese children with OSA were persistent
after T&A therapy. In general, AHI (events/h) measures decreased from 22.26 ±
9.141 to 8.88 ± 5.909 before and after a 6-month follow-up period, respectively, 
and nadir SaO₂ (%) levels increased from 74.26 ± 7.486 to 86.37 ± 5.578 pre- and 
post-surgery, respectively. However, no discernible differences in BMI measures
before and after a 6-month follow-up period (40.996 ± 5.2486 vs. 40.597 ± 5.0540)
were observed. No significant differences in the TNF-α and IL-6 levels pre- and
post-surgery were observed. TNF-α and IL-6 plasma levels were highly correlated
with BMI measurements (TNF-α: r(2)=0.2350, P<0.001; IL-6: r(2)=0.6629, P<0.001). 
In contrast, there was no association between plasma levels and AHI measures
(TNF-α: r(2)=0.03377, P=0.0829; IL-6: r(2)=0.03946, P=0.0605).
CONCLUSION: T&A therapy can improve clinical symptoms and signs but is not a cure
for the treatment of obese children with OSA. The inflammation levels of TNF-α
and IL-6 changed little. To reduce the risk for excessive daytime sleepiness,
supplementary therapies should be introduced for OSA.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 23489884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2013 Jun 1;187(1):31-40. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2013.02.017. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Inflammatory and immunomodulatory mechanisms in the carotid body.

Porzionato A(1), Macchi V, De Caro R, Di Giulio C.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Anatomy, Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova,
Padova, Italy. andrea.porzionato@unipd.it

Evidence is available about the role of inflammatory/immunological factors in the
physiology and plasticity of the carotid body, with potential clinical
implications in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and sudden infant death
syndrome. In humans, lymphomonocytic aggregations (chronic carotid glomitis) have
been reported in aging and opiate addiction. Glomus cells produce prostaglandin
E2 and the cytokines interleukin 1β, interleukin 6 and TNF-α, with corresponding 
receptors. These factors modulate glomus cell excitability, catecholamine release
and/or chemoreceptor discharge. The above cytokines are up-regulated in chronic
sustained or intermittent hypoxia, and prevention of these changes, with
ibuprofen or dexamethasone, may modulate hypoxia-induced changes in carotid body 
chemosensitivity. The main transcription factors considered to be involved are
NF-kB and HIFs. Circulating immunogens (lipopolysaccharide) and cytokines may
also affect peripheral arterial chemoreception, with the carotid body exerting an
immunosensing function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56249. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056249. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Biomarkers and bacterial pneumonia risk in patients with treated HIV infection: a
case-control study.

Bjerk SM(1), Baker JV, Emery S, Neuhaus J, Angus B, Gordin FM, Pett SL, Stephan
C, Kunisaki KM; INSIGHT SMART Study Group.

Collaborators: Gordin F, Finley E, Dietz D, Chesson C, Vjecha M, Standridge B,
Schmetter B, Grue L, Willoughby M, Demers A, Lundgren JD, Phillips A, Dragsted
UB, Jensen KB, Fau A, Borup L, Pearson M, Jansson PO, Jensen BG, Benfield TL,
Darbyshire JH, Babiker AG, Palfreeman AJ, Fleck SL, Collaco-Moraes Y, Cordwell B,
Dodds W, van Hooff F, Wyzydrag L, Cooper DA, Emery S, Drummond FM, Connor SA,
Satchell CS, Gunn S, Oka S, Delfino MA, Merlin K, McGinley C, Neaton JD, Bartsch 
G, DuChene A, George M, Grund B, Harrison M, Hogan C, Krum E, Larson G, Miller C,
Nelson R, Neuhaus J, Roediger MP, Schultz T, Thackeray L, Prineas R, Campbell C, 
Perez G, Lifson A, Duprez D, Hoy J, Lahart C, Perlman D, Price R, Prineas R,
Rhame F, Sampson J, Worley J, Rein M, DerSimonian R, Brody BA, Daar ES, Dubler
NN, Fleming TR, Freeman DJ, Kahn JP, Kim KM, Medoff G, Modlin JF, Moellering R
Jr, Murray BE, Pick B, Robb ML, Scharfstein DO, Sugarman J, Tsiatis A, Tuazon C, 
Zoloth L, Lehrman S, Klingman K, Lazovski J, Belloso WH, Losso MH, Benetucci JA, 
Aquilia S, Bittar V, Bogdanowicz EP, Cahn PE, Casiró AD, Cassetti I, Contarelli
JM, Corral JA, Crinejo A, Daciuk L, David DO, Guaragna G, Ishida MT, Krolewiecki 
A, Laplume HE, Lasala MB, Lourtau L, Lupo SH, Maranzana A, Masciottra F, Michaan 
M, Ruggieri L, Salazar E, Sánchez M, Somenzini C, Hoy JF, Rogers GD, Allworth AM,
Anderson JS, Armishaw J, Barnes K, Carr A, Chiam A, Chuah JC, Curry MC, Dever RL,
Donohue WA, Doong NC, Dwyer DE, Dyer J, Eu B, Ferguson VW, French MA, Garsia RJ, 
Gold J, Hudson JH, Jeganathan S, Konecny P, Leung J, McCormack CL, McMurchie M,
Medland N, Moore RJ, Moussa MB, Orth D, Piper M, Read T, Roney JJ, Roth N, Shaw
DR, Silvers J, Smith DJ, Street AC, Vale RJ, Wendt NA, Wood H, Youds DW, Zillman 
J, Rieger A, Tozeau V, Aichelburg A, Vetter N, Clumeck N, Dewit S, de Roo A,
Kabeya K, Leonard P, Lynen L, Moutschen M, O'Doherty E, Pereira LC Jr, Souza TN, 
Schechter M, Zajdenverg R, Almeida MM, Araujo F, Bahia F, Brites C, Caseiro MM,
Casseb J, Etzel A, Falco GG, Filho EC, Flint SR, Gonzales CR, Madruga JV, Passos 
LN, Reuter T, Sidi LC, Toscano AL, Zarowny D, Cherban E, Cohen J, Conway B,
Dufour C, Ellis M, Foster A, Haase D, Haldane H, Houde M, Kato C, Klein M,
Lessard B, Martel A, Martel C, McFarland N, Paradis E, Piche A, Sandre R, Schlech
W, Schmidt S, Smaill F, Thompson B, Trottier S, Vezina S, Walmsley S, Wolff Reyes
MJ, Northland R, Ostergaard L, Pedersen C, Nielsen H, Hergens L, Loftheim IR,
Jensen KB, Raukas M, Zilmer K, Justinen J, Ristola M, Girard PM, Landman R, Abel 
S, Abgrall S, Amat K, Auperin L, Barruet R, Benalycherif A, Benammar N, Bensalem 
M, Bentata M, Besnier JM, Blanc M, Bouchaud O, Cabie A, Chavannet P, Chennebault 
JM, Dargere S, de la Tribonniere X, Debord T, Decaux N, Delgado J, Dupon M,
Durant J, Frixon- Marin V, Genet C, Gérard L, Gilquin J, Hoen B, Jeantils V,
Kouadio H, Leclercq P, Lelièvre J-, Levy Y, Michon CP, Nau P, Pacanowski J,
Piketty C, Poizot-Martin I, Raymond I, Salmon D, Schmit JL, Serini MA, Simon A,
Tassi S, Touam F, Verdon R, Weinbreck P, Weiss L, Yazdanpanah Y, Yeni P,
Fätkenheuer G, Staszewski S, Bergmann F, Bitsch S, Bogner JR, Brockmeyer N, Esser
S, Goebel FD, Hartmann M, Klinker H, Lehmann C, Lennemann T, Plettenberg A,
Potthof A, Rockstroh J, Ross B, Stoehr A, Wasmuth JC, Wiedemeyer K, Winzer R,
Hatzakis A, Touloumi G, Antoniadou A, Daikos GL, Dimitrakaki A,
Gargalianos-Kakolyris P, Giannaris M, Karafoulidou A, Katsambas A, Katsarou O,
Kontos AN, Kordossis T, Lazanas MK, Panagopoulos P, Panos G, Paparizos V,
Papastamopoulos V, Petrikkos G, Sambatakou H, Skoutelis A, Tsogas N, Xylomenos G,
Bergin CJ, Mooka B, Pollack S, Mamorksy MG, Agmon-Levin N, Karplus R, Kedem E,
Maayan S, Shahar E, Sthoeger Z, Turner D, Yust I, Tambussi G, Rusconi V, Abeli C,
Bechi M, Biglino A, Bonora S, Butini L, Carosi G, Casari S, Corpolongo A, De
Gioanni M, Di Perri G, Di Pietro M, D'Offizi G, Esposito R, Mazzotta F, Montroni 
M, Nardini G, Nozza S, Quirino T, Raise E, Honda M, Ishisaka M, Caplinskas S,
Uzdaviniene V, Schmit JC, Staub T, Himmich H, Marhoum El Filali K, Mills GD,
Blackmore T, Masters JA, Morgan J, Pithie A, Brunn J, Ormasssen V, La Rosa A,
Guerra O, Espichan M, Gutierrez L, Mendo F, Salazar R, Knytz B, Horban A,
Bakowska E, Beniowski M, Gasiorowski J, Kwiatkowski J, Antunes F, Castro RS,
Doroana M, Horta A, Mansinho K, Miranda AC, Pinto IV, Valadas E, Vera J,
Rakhmanova A, Vinogradova E, Yakovlev A, Zakharova N, Wood R, Orrel C, Gatell J, 
Arnaiz JA, Carrillo R, Clotet B, Dalmau D, González A, Jordano Q, Jou A, Knobel
H, Larrousse M, Mata R, Moreno JS, Oretaga E, Pena JN, Pulido F, Rubio R, Sanz J,
Viciana P, Hirschel B, Spycher R, Battegay M, Bernasconi E, Bottone S, Cavassini 
M, Christen A, Franc C, Furrer HJ, Gayet-Ageron A, Genné D, Hochstrasser S,
Magenta L, Moens C, Müller N, Nüesch R, Phanuphak P, Ruxrungtham K, Pumpradit W, 
Chetchotisakd P, Dangthongdee S, Kiertiburanakul S, Klinbuayaem V, Mootsikapun P,
Nonenoy S, Piyavong B, Prasithsirikul W, Raksakulkarn P, Gazzard BG, Ainsworth
JG, Anderson J, Angus BJ, Barber TJ, Brook MG, Care CD, Chadwick DR, Chikohora M,
Churchill DR, Cornforth D, Dockrell DH, Easterbrook PJ, Fox PA, Fox R, Gomez PA, 
Gompels MM, Harris GM, Herman S, Jackson AG, Jebakumar SP, Johnson MA, Kinghorn
GR, Kuldanek KA, Larbalestier N, Leen C, Lumsden M, Maher T, Mantell J, Maw R,
McKernan S, McLean L, Morris S, Muromba L, Orkin CM, Palfreeman AJ, Peters BS,
Peto TE, Portsmouth SD, Rajamanoharan S, Ronan A, Schwenk A, Slinn MA, Stroud CJ,
Thomas RC, Wansbrough-Jones MH, Whiles HJ, White DJ, Williams E, Williams IG,
Youle M, Abrams DI, Acosta EA, Adams S, Adamski A, Andrews L, Antoniskis D,
Aragon DR, Arduino R, Artz R, Bailowitz J, Barnett BJ, Baroni C, Barron M, Baxter
JD, Beers D, Beilke M, Bemenderfer D, Bernard A, Besch CL, Bessesen MT, Bethel
JT, Blue S, Blum JD, Boarden S, Bolan RK, Borgman JB, Brar I, Braxton BK, Bredeek
UF, Brennan R, Britt DE, Brockelman J, Brown S, Bruzzese V, Bulgin-Coleman D,
Bullock DE, Cafaro V, Campbell B, Caras S, Carroll J, Casey KK, Chiang F,
Childress G, Cindrich RB, Clark C, Climo M, Cohen C, Coley J, Condoluci DV,
Contreras R, Corser J, Cozzolino J, Crane LR, Daley L, Dandridge D, D'Antuono V, 
Darcourt Rizo Patron JG, DeHovitz JA, DeJesus E, DesJardin J, Diaz-Linares M,
Dietrich C, Dodson P, Dolce E, Elliott K, Erickson D, Estes M, Faber LL, Falbo J,
Farrough MJ, Farthing CF, Ferrell-Gonzalez P, Flynn H, Frank C, Frank M, Freeman 
KF, French N, Friedland G, Fujita N, Gahagan L, Genther K, Gilson I, Goetz MB,
Goodwin E, Graziano F, Guity CK, Gulick P, Gunderson ER, Hale CM, Hannah K,
Henderson H, Hennessey K, Henry WK, Higgins DT, Hodder SL, Horowitz HW,
Howe-Pittman M, Hubbard J, Hudson R, Hunter H, Hutelmyer C, Insignares MT,
Jackson L, Jenny L, John M, Johnson DL, Johnson G, Johnson J, Johnson L, Kaatz J,
Kaczmarski J, Kagan S, Kantor C, Kempner T, Kieckhaus K, Kimmel N, Klaus BM,
Klimas N, Koeppe JR, Koirala J, Kopka J, Kostman JR, Kozal MJ, Kumar A, Labriola 
A, Lampiris H, Lamprecht C, Lattanzi KM, Lee J, Leggett J, Long C, Loquere A,
Loveless K, Lucasti CJ, Luskin-Hawk R, MacVeigh M, Makohon LH, Mannheimer S,
Markowitz NP, Marks C, Martinez N, Martorell C, McFeaters E, McGee B, McIntyre
DM, McKee J, McManus E, Melecio LG, Melton D, Mercad S, Merrifield E, Mieras JA, 
Mogyoros M, Moran FM, Murphy K, Mushatt D, Mutic S, Nadeem I, Nadler JP, Nahass
R, Nixon D, O'Brien S, Ognjan A, O'Hearn M, O'Keefe K, Okhuysen PC, Oldfield E,
Olson D, Orenstein R, Ortiz R, Osterberger J, Owen W, Parpart F, Pastore-Lange V,
Paul S, Pavlatos A, Pearce DD, Pelz R, Perez G, Peterson S, Pierone G Jr, Pitrak 
D, Powers SL, Pujet HC, Raaum JW, Ravishankar J, Reeder J, Regevik N, Reilly NA, 
Reyelt C, Riddell J 4th, Rimland D, Robinson ML, Rodriguez AE, Rodriguez-Barradas
MC, Rodriguez Derouen V, Roland R, Rosmarin C, Rossen WL, Rouff JR, Sampson JH,
Sands M, Savini C, Schrader S, Schulte MM, Scott C, Scott R, Seedhom H, Sension
M, Sheble- Hall A, Sheridan A, Shuter J, Slater LN, Slotten R, Slowinski D, Smith
M, Snap S, States DM, Stewart M, Stringer G, Sullivan J, Summers KK, Swanson K,
Sweeton IB, Szabo S, Tedaldi EM, Telzak EE, Temesgen Z, Thomas D, Thompson MA,
Thompson S, Ting Hong Bong C, Tobin C, Uy J, Vaccaro A, Vasco LM, Vecino I,
Verlinghieri GK, Visnegarwala F, Wade BH, Watson V, Weis SE, Weise JA, Weissman
S, Wilkin AM, Williams L, Witter JH, Wojtusic L, Wright TJ, Yeh V, Young B, Zeana
C, Zeh J, Savio E, Vacarezza M.

BACKGROUND: Despite advances in HIV treatment, bacterial pneumonia continues to
cause considerable morbidity and mortality in patients with HIV infection.
Studies of biomarker associations with bacterial pneumonia risk in treated
HIV-infected patients do not currently exist.
METHODS: We performed a nested, matched, case-control study among participants
randomized to continuous combination antiretroviral therapy (cART) in the
Strategies for Management of Antiretroviral Therapy trial. Patients who developed
bacterial pneumonia (cases) and patients without bacterial pneumonia (controls)
were matched 1∶1 on clinical center, smoking status, age, and baseline cART use. 
Baseline levels of Club Cell Secretory Protein 16 (CC16), Surfactant Protein D
(SP-D), C-reactive protein (hsCRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and d-dimer were
compared between cases and controls.
RESULTS: Cases (n = 72) and controls (n = 72) were 25.7% female, 51.4% black,
65.3% current smokers, 9.7% diabetic, 36.1% co-infected with Hepatitis B/C, and
75.0% were on cART at baseline. Median (IQR) age was 45 (41, 51) years with CD4+ 
count of 553 (436, 690) cells/mm(3). Baseline CC16 and SP-D were similar between 
cases and controls, but hsCRP was significantly higher in cases than controls
(2.94 µg/mL in cases vs. 1.93 µg/mL in controls; p = 0.02). IL-6 and d-dimer
levels were also higher in cases compared to controls, though differences were
not statistically significant (p-value 0.06 and 0.10, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with cART-treated HIV infection, higher levels of
systemic inflammatory markers were associated with increased bacterial pneumonia 
risk, while two pulmonary-specific inflammatory biomarkers, CC16 and SP-D, were
not associated with bacterial pneumonia risk.

PMCID: PMC3574140
PMID: 23457535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013 Sep;38(9):1658-67. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2013.01.011. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

Blunted nocturnal cortisol rise is associated with higher carotid artery
intima-media thickness (CIMT) in overweight African American and Latino youth.

Toledo-Corral CM(1), Myers SJ, Li Y, Hodis HN, Goran MI, Weigensberg MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, United States.

BACKGROUND: Blunted diurnal cortisol variation has been associated with overt
cardiovascular disease in adults. The relationship between the diurnal cortisol
variation and subclinical atherosclerosis in youth has yet to be investigated.
The objectives of this study were to (1) determine the relationship between
overnight cortisol measures and CIMT in overweight and obese, African-American
and Latino children; (2) assess ethnic differences in these relationships; and
(3) explore whether overnight cortisol and CIMT relationships were independent of
inflammatory markers, C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor-∝ (TNF-∝).
METHODS: One hundred fifty-six overweight and obese African-American and Latino
children (ages 8-17, 86 M/70 F, 55 African-American/101 Latino) underwent
measures of CIMT by B-mode ultrasound, nocturnal cortisol rise (NCR = salivary
cortisol rise from 2200 h to awakening at 0530 h), cortisol awakening response
(CAR = salivary cortisol from time of awakening to 30 min later), fasting serum
cortisol and overnight urinary free cortisol.
RESULTS: Using linear regression, salivary cortisol(0530 h) and NCR were
negatively associated with CIMT (β(standardized) = -0.215 and -0.220, p < 0.01)
independent of age, height, percent body fat, ethnicity and systolic blood
pressure. Nocturnal salivary cortisol(2200 h), morning serum cortisol, and
overnight urinary free cortisol were not associated with CIMT. Using ANCOVA,
participants with LOW NCR (NCR < 0.44 μg/dL, n = 52) had significantly greater
CIMT than those with HIGH NCR (NCR ≥ 0.91 μg/dL, n = 52; 0.632 ± 0.008 vs. 0.603 
± 0.008 mm, p=0.01) after controlling for covariates. Ethnicity was independently
associated with CIMT, whereby African-American children had greater CIMT than
Latino children (-0.028 ± 0.009, p=0.006). The relationships between cortisol
measures and CIMT did not differ between the two ethnic groups (all
p(interaction) = 0.28-0.97). CRP, IL-6 and TNF-∝ were not associated with CIMT (p
> 0.05). IL-6 was inversely related to NCR (r = -0.186, p = 0.03), but it did not
explain the relationship between NCR and CIMT.
CONCLUSIONS: Salivary cortisol(0530 h) and NCR, but not CAR, nocturnal salivary
cortisol(2200 h), morning serum cortisol or overnight urinary free cortisol were 
associated with CIMT, independent of relevant covariates, including inflammatory 
factors. A low awakening salivary cortisol or a blunted NCR may be related to
increased atherosclerosis risk in overweight and obese minority youth. These
findings support adult studies suggesting flattened daytime diurnal cortisol
variation impacts cardiovascular disease risk.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3722251
PMID: 23433749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013 Feb 21;15(1):205. doi: 10.1186/ar4146.

The role of the circadian clock in rheumatoid arthritis.

Gibbs JE, Ray DW.

Rheumatoid arthritis exhibits diurnal variation in symptoms, with patients
suffering with increased painful joint stiffness in the early morning. This
correlates with an early morning rise in circulating levels of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, such as interleukin-6. This temporal variation in disease pathology is
directed by the circadian clock, both at a systemic level, through signalling
pathways derived in the central clock, and at a local level by autonomous clocks 
found within inflammatory organs and cells. Indeed, many cellular components of
the immune system, which are involved in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid
arthritis, possess independent clocks that facilitate temporal gating of their
functions. Furthermore, the circadian clock regulates the expression and activity
of several genes and proteins that have demonstrated roles in progression of this
autoimmune disease. These include a number of nuclear receptors and also
fat-derived adipokines. Employing the knowledge we have about how the
inflammatory response is regulated by the clock will facilitate the development
of chronotherapy regimens to improve the efficacy of current treatment
strategies. Furthermore, a full understanding of the mechanisms by which the
clock couples to the immune system may provide novel therapeutic targets for the 
treatment of this debilitating disease.

PMCID: PMC3672712
PMID: 23427807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Apr;7(4):1117-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1331. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Altered melatonin secretion and circadian gene expression with increased
proinflammatory cytokine expression in early-stage sepsis patients.

Li CX(1), Liang DD, Xie GH, Cheng BL, Chen QX, Wu SJ, Wang JL, Cho W, Fang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China.

Inflammatory and immune responses, as well as melatonin secretion, are affected
by circadian regulation. Abnormal circadian rhythm of melatonin release has been 
reported to be associated with the later stages of sepsis; however, its role in
the early stages of sepsis is unclear. We studied 11 septic and 11 non-septic
patients in our intensive care unit (ICU). Peripheral blood was drawn at 4-h
intervals on the first day, beginning at 2:00 p.m., over a total period of 24 h. 
Plasma levels of melatonin, tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) and interleukin 6
(IL-6) were measured by radioimmunoassay or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA). Messenger RNA levels of circadian genes Cry-1 and Per-2 were analyzed
using quantitative real-time PCR. Results show the circadian rhythm of melatonin 
secretion was altered in the early stages of sepsis. The melatonin secretion
acrophase occurred earlier in septic patients at 6:00 p.m., compared with at 2:00
a.m. in non-septic ICU patients. Compared with the non-septic group, both Cry-1
and Per-2 expression were significantly decreased while TNF-α and IL-6 expression
were significantly increased in septic patients [TNF-α, 64.1 (43.6-89.1) vs. 11.4
(10.4-12.5) ng/ml; IL-6, 41.2 (35.7-50.8) vs. 19.1 (16-136.7) ng/ml; median
(range), both P=0.04]. The peak concentrations of TNF-α and IL-6 were shown to be
in concordance with the rhythm of melatonin secretion. The circadian rhythm of
melatonin secretion and circadian gene expression were altered in the early
stages of sepsis, which likely led to the changes in pro-inflammatory cytokine
release. These findings shed light on the potential link between circadian rhythm
and the progression of early-stage sepsis.

PMID: 23426900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Chest. 2013 Jun;143(6):1733-9. doi: 10.1378/chest.12-1033.

Airway vascular endothelial function in healthy smokers without systemic
endothelial dysfunction.

Mendes ES(1), Cancado JE, Rebolledo P, Arana J, Parker M, Gonzalez A, Hurwitz BE,
Wanner A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. emendes@med.miami.edu

BACKGROUND: Cigarette smoking can lead to systemic endothelial dysfunction. Since
the airway circulation is exposed to a high concentration of cigarette smoke
constituents, we reasoned that airway vascular endothelial dysfunction could be
present in healthy smokers without systemic endothelial dysfunction.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to compare airway and systemic
endothelial function and measure markers of systemic inflammation in lung-healthy
current smokers. Since endothelial dysfunction in smokers has been related to
systemic inflammation, we also investigated its response to an inhaled
glucocorticosteroid (ICS).
METHODS: Fifteen healthy, current smokers and 17 healthy, lifetime nonsmokers
were enrolled. Smokers were randomly assigned to 3-week treatments with inhaled
fluticasone propionate or placebo in a crossover design. Vascular endothelial
function was assessed in the airway by the airway blood-flow response to inhaled 
albuterol (ΔQaw) and in the extrapulmonary circulation by brachial arterial
flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD). Venous blood was collected for C-reactive
protein and IL-6.
RESULTS: Baseline parameters did not differ between groups except for ΔQaw, which
was greater in nonsmokers (45% ± 12%) than smokers (1% ± 12%) (P = .001). In the 
smokers, ICS treatment increased Qaw to 41% ± 7% (P &lt; .001), but had no effect
on FMD or inflammatory markers. There was an inverse relationship between
baseline and ICS-induced changes in ΔQaw.
CONCLUSIONS: Healthy smokers with no signs of systemic inflammation or
endothelial dysfunction display impaired airway vascular endothelial function,
possibly preceding systemic endothelial dysfunction. Airway endothelial function 
was restored with an ICS, and the response was directly related to the severity
of endothelial dysfunction.

PMID: 23348843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54049. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054049. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Circadian timekeeping is disturbed in rheumatoid arthritis at molecular level.

Kouri VP(1), Olkkonen J, Kaivosoja E, Ainola M, Juhila J, Hovatta I, Konttinen
YT, Mandelin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) have disturbances in the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. These are reflected in altered
circadian rhythm of circulating serum cortisol, melatonin and IL-6 levels and in 
chronic fatigue. We hypothesized that the molecular machinery responsible for the
circadian timekeeping is perturbed in RA. The aim of this study was to
investigate the expression of circadian clock in RA.
METHODS: Gene expression of thirteen clock genes was analyzed in the synovial
membrane of RA and control osteoarthritis (OA) patients. BMAL1 protein was
detected using immunohistochemistry. Cell autonomous clock oscillation was
started in RA and OA synovial fibroblasts using serum shock. The effect of
pro-inflammatory stimulus on clock gene expression in synovial fibroblasts was
studied using IL-6 and TNF-α.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis disclosed disconcerted circadian timekeeping
and immunohistochemistry revealed strong cytoplasmic localization of BMAL1 in RA 
patients. Perturbed circadian timekeeping is at least in part inflammation
independent and cell autonomous, because RA synovial fibroblasts display altered 
circadian expression of several clock components, and perturbed circadian
production of IL-6 and IL-1β after clock resetting. However, inflammatory
stimulus disturbs the rhythm in cultured fibroblasts. Throughout the experiments 
ARNTL2 and NPAS2 appeared to be the most affected clock genes in human
immune-inflammatory conditions.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the molecular machinery controlling the circadian
rhythm is disturbed in RA patients.

PMCID: PMC3546002
PMID: 23335987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Curr Opin Support Palliat Care. 2013 Mar;7(1):54-9. doi:
10.1097/SPC.0b013e32835dabe3.

Inflammation and neural signaling: etiologic mechanisms of the cancer
treatment-related symptom cluster.

Wood LJ(1), Weymann K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, MGH Institute of Health Professions, Boston, Massachusetts 
02129, USA. ljwood@mghihp.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cancer patients undergoing treatment with cytotoxic
chemotherapeutic agents (CCAs) often experience a cluster of treatment-related
symptoms, which include fatigue, loss of appetite, disturbed sleep, depressed
mood, cognitive difficulties, and changes in body composition. This symptom
cluster collectively referred to herein as cancer treatment-related symptoms
(CTRSs) decrease quality of life, and physical and social functioning. The
preclinical and clinical studies described in this review represent important
progress in understanding potential underlying mechanisms of CTRS.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent studies support a role for CCA-induced interleukin-1β
(IL-1β) signaling in the cause of CTRS. CCAs may share a common ability to
activate intracellular stress response pathways to trigger the synthesis,
processing, and release of IL-1β from immune cells. Fatigue, sleep disturbance,
and cognitive difficulties in cancer patients exposed to CCAs correlate with
plasma levels of IL-6, IL-1 receptor antagonist, and soluble tumor necrosis
factor receptor-I/II, surrogate markers of IL-1β-mediated central nervous system 
(CNS) inflammation. Additional preclinical work suggests IL-1β-mediated CNS
inflammation may cause CTRS by altering hypothalamic and hippocampal functioning.
SUMMARY: Although additional research is necessary to further establish the link 
between CCA exposure, IL-1β-mediated inflammatory processes and CTRS, these data 
provide hints for future studies and therapeutic approaches in ameliorating these
symptoms in cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC3951773
PMID: 23314015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052585. Epub 2013 Jan 3.

Monocytes from depressed patients display an altered pattern of response to
endotoxin challenge.

Lisi L(1), Camardese G, Treglia M, Tringali G, Carrozza C, Janiri L, Dello Russo 
C, Navarra P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Catholic University Medical School, Rome, Italy.

It is now well established that major depression is accompanied and characterized
by altered responses of the immune-inflammatory system. In this study we
investigated the pro-inflammatory activation of monocytes isolated from depressed
patients as a parameter not influenced by such confounds as the time of day, the 
nutritional and exercise status or the age and gender of patients. Monocytes from
depressed patients and from healthy controls were isolated in vitro; after 24-h
incubation under basal conditions, cells were exposed for 24-h to 100 ng/ml of
endotoxin (bacterial lipopolysaccharide, LPS). We found that monocytes from
drug-free depressed patients and controls release the same amounts of
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) under basal conditions, whereas monocytes from patients
are dramatically less reactive to LPS (8.62-fold increase vs previous 24 hrs)
compared to healthy controls (123.3-fold increase vs previous 24 hrs). Such
blunted prostanoid production was paralleled by a reduction in COX-2 gene
expression, whereas other pro-inflammatory mediators, namely interleukin-1β (IL-1
β) and -6 (IL-6) showed a trend to increased gene expression. The above changes
were not associated to increased levels of circulating glucocorticoids. After 8
months of antidepressive drug treatment, the increase in PGE2 production after
the endotoxin challenge was partially restored, whereas the increase in IL-1 β
and -6 levels observed at baseline was completely abolished. In conclusion, our
findings show that the reactivity of monocytes from depressed patients might be
considered as a marker of the immune-inflammatory disorders associated to
depression, although the lack of paired healthy controls at follow-up does not
allow to conclude that monocyte reactivity to endotoxin is also a marker of
treatment outcome.

PMCID: PMC3536788
PMID: 23300980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2013 Mar;22(3):374-81. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-12-0987. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Health behaviors predict higher interleukin-6 levels among patients newly
diagnosed with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Duffy SA(1), Teknos T, Taylor JM, Fowler KE, Islam M, Wolf GT, McLean S, Ghanem
TA, Terrell JE.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding Author: Sonia A. Duffy, University of Michigan, School of
Nursing, 400 North Ingalls Building, Room 3178, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5482, USA.
bump@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Health behaviors have been shown to be associated with recurrence
risk and survival rates in patients with cancer and are also associated with
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels, but few epidemiologic studies have investigated the 
relationship of health behaviors and IL-6 among cancer populations. The purpose
of the study is to look at the relationship between five health behaviors, viz.: 
smoking, alcohol problems, body mass index (BMI; a marker of nutritional status),
physical activity, and sleep and pretreatment IL-6 levels in persons with head
and neck cancer.
METHODS: Patients (N = 409) were recruited in otolaryngology clinic waiting rooms
and invited to complete written surveys. A medical record audit was also
conducted. Descriptive statistics and multivariate analyses were conducted to
determine which health behaviors were associated with higher IL-6 levels
controlling for demographic and clinical variables among patients with newly
diagnosed head and neck cancer.
RESULTS: While smoking, alcohol problems, BMI, physical activity, and sleep were 
associated with IL-6 levels in bivariate analysis, only smoking (current and
former) and decreased sleep were independent predictors of higher IL-6 levels in 
multivariate regression analysis. Covariates associated with higher IL-6 levels
were age and higher tumor stage, whereas comorbidities were marginally
significant.
CONCLUSION: Health behaviors, particularly smoking and sleep disturbances, are
associated with higher IL-6 levels among patients with head and neck cancer.
IMPACT: Treating health behavior problems, especially smoking and sleep
disturbances, may be beneficial to decreasing IL-6 levels, which could have a
beneficial effect on overall cancer treatment outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3596441
PMID: 23300019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Chronobiol Int. 2013 May;30(4):502-9. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.742102. Epub
2013 Jan 2.

Effects of partial sleep deprivation on proinflammatory cytokines, growth
hormone, and steroid hormone concentrations during repeated brief sprint interval
exercise.

Abedelmalek S(1), Souissi N, Chtourou H, Denguezli M, Aouichaoui C, Ajina M,
Aloui A, Dogui M, Haddouk S, Tabka Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, Sousse, Tunisia.

The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of partial sleep
deprivation (PSD) on circulating concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) in relation to the secretory profiles of growth
hormone (GH), cortisol, and testosterone during a repeated brief sprint interval 
exercise. Thirty healthy football players (mean age: 21.1 [range: 18-24] years;
body mass index [BMI]: 22.6 [range: 18.47-24.46] Kg/m(2)) completed two test
sessions at 08:00 h, one scheduled after a baseline night (bedtime: from 22:30 to
07:00 h) and the other after a PSD night caused by an early awakening (bedtime:
from 22:30 to 03:00 h). During each session, participants performed 4 × 250-m run
on a treadmill at a constant intensity of 80% of the personal maximal speed with 
a 3-min recovery in between. Tests session were performed at 08:00 h. Blood
samples were collected before, immediately after the first and the fourth 250-m
run, and 60 min after the exercise. The results showed that cortisol
concentrations were not affected by the PSD. However, GH and testosterone
concentrations were higher (p < .05) 60 min after the exercise during PSD in
comparison with baseline. Likewise, plasma concentrations of IL-6 and TNF-α were 
higher (p < .05) after PSD during the exercise (i.e., the first and the fourth
run) and remained elevated during the recovery period (i.e., 60 min after the
exercise). In conclusion, these results showed that sleep restriction increases
the proinflammatory cytokine, GH, and testosterone concentrations after physical 
exercise but did not affect the cortisol responses.

PMID: 23281720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Coron Artery Dis. 2013 May;24(3):177-82. doi: 10.1097/MCA.0b013e32835cbef5.

Aerobic interval exercise training in the afternoon reduces attacks of coronary
spastic angina in conjunction with improvement in endothelial function, oxidative
stress, and inflammation.

Morikawa Y(1), Mizuno Y, Harada E, Katoh D, Kashiwagi Y, Morita S, Yoshimura M,
Uemura S, Saito Y, Yasue H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Kumamoto Kinoh Hospital, Kumamoto Aging
Research Institute, Kumamoto City, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Coronary spasm plays an important role in the pathogenesis of
ischemic heart disease. Endothelial function is impaired in patients with
coronary spasm. Exercise training has been shown to improve endothelial function.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the effects of aerobic interval exercise training (AIT) on
attacks in conjunction with endothelial function in patients with coronary
spastic angina.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: The study participants were 26 patients with rest
angina (19 men and 7 women, mean age 61.7±11.7 years) in whom coronary spasm was 
documented and no severe organic lesions were found. The numbers of attacks and
of individuals with attacks were examined in conjunction with endothelial
function, oxidative stress, inflammation, and insulin resistance before and after
3 successive days of AIT.
RESULTS: The number of attacks/patient and the ratio of patients with attacks/5
days decreased [from 2 (1, 7) to 0 (0, 2), P<0.001, and from 23/26 (88.5%) to
10/26 (38.5%), P<0.001] in conjunction with the improvement in endothelial
function assessed by improved flow-mediated dilatation (4.8±2.7 vs. 6.9±2.8%,
P<0.001), plasma levels of diacron-reactive oxygen metabolites (363±58 vs. 349±61
U.CARR, P=0.001), interleukin-6[1.63 (1.33, 2.22) vs. 1.39 (1.09, 2.02) pg/ml,
P=0.012], high-sensitivity C-reactive protein [0.087 (0.041, 0.136) vs. 0.063
(0.028, 0.085) mg/dl, P=0.028], and homeostasis model assessment-insulin
resistance [1.79 (1.41, 2.39) vs. 1.54 (1.17, 1.79) mg/dl µU/ml, P=0.005] after
AIT.
CONCLUSION: AIT in the afternoon suppressed the attacks in conjunction with
improvement in endothelial function, oxidative stress, inflammation, and insulin 
resistance in patients with coronary spastic angina.

PMID: 23249633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2012 Nov 8;13:218. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-13-218.

Biomarkers of peripheral muscle fatigue during exercise.

Finsterer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Postfach 20, 1180, Vienna, Austria.
fifs1@yahoo.de

BACKGROUND: Biomarkers of peripheral muscle fatigue (BPMFs) are used to offer
insights into mechanisms of exhaustion during exercise in order to detect
abnormal fatigue or to detect defective metabolic pathways. This review aims at
describing recent advances and future perspectives concerning the most important 
biomarkers of muscle fatigue during exercise.
RESULTS: BPMFs are classified according to the mechanism of fatigue related to
adenosine-triphosphate-metabolism, acidosis, or oxidative-metabolism. Muscle
fatigue is also related to an immunological response. impaired calcium handling, 
disturbances in bioenergetic pathways, and genetic responses. The immunological
and genetic response may make the muscle susceptible to fatigue but may not
directly cause muscle fatigue. Production of BPMFs is predominantly dependent on 
the type of exercise. BPMFs need to change as a function of the process being
monitored, be stable without appreciable diurnal variations, correlate well with 
exercise intensity, and be present in detectable amounts in easily accessible
biological fluids. The most well-known BPMFs are serum lactate and interleukin-6.
The most widely applied clinical application is screening for defective oxidative
metabolism in mitochondrial disorders by means of the lactate stress test. The
clinical relevance of most other BPMFs, however, is under debate, since they
often depend on age, gender, physical fitness, the energy supply during exercise,
the type of exercise needed to produce the BPMF, and whether healthy or diseased 
subjects are investigated.
CONCLUSIONS: Though the role of BPMFs during fatigue is poorly understood,
measuring BPMFs under specific, standardised conditions appears to be helpful for
assessing biological states or processes during exercise and fatigue.

PMCID: PMC3534479
PMID: 23136874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neurol Clin. 2012 Nov;30(4):1313-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2012.08.007.

The sleep-immunity relationship.

Gamaldo CE(1), Shaikh AK, McArthur JC.

Author information: 
(1)Neurology, Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins Sleep Disorders
Center, 600 North Wolfe Street, Meyer 6-119, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.
cgamald1@jhmi.edu

Research models show a strong interrelationship between sleep quality and immune 
function. The proinflammatory cytokines, interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor 
necrosis factor α are classified as official sleep-regulatory substances.
However, sleep-promoting properties are also possessed by several other immune
and proinflammatory cellular classes. This article reviews the current
physiologic evidence for the prominent somnogenic and sleep-regulatory properties
inherent to these immune substances. Clinical examples of this relationship are
discussed from the perspective of infectious and primarily immune-related
conditions associated with significant sleep disruption and from the perspective 
of immune dysregulation associated with several primary sleep disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23099140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;18(6):692-9. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.144. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Evidence for a differential role of HPA-axis function, inflammation and metabolic
syndrome in melancholic versus atypical depression.

Lamers F(1), Vogelzangs N, Merikangas KR, de Jonge P, Beekman AT, Penninx BW.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Research Branch, Intramural Research Program, National
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-3720, USA. lamersf@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;18(6):632-4.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the inflammatory response
system have been suggested as pathophysiological mechanisms implicated in the
etiology of major depressive disorder (MDD). Although meta-analyses do confirm
associations between depression and these biological systems, effect sizes vary
greatly among individual studies. A potentially important factor explaining
variability is heterogeneity of MDD. Aim of this study was to evaluate the
association between depressive subtypes (based on latent class analysis) and
biological measures. Data from 776 persons from the Netherlands Study of
Depression and Anxiety, including 111 chronic depressed persons with melancholic 
depression, 122 with atypical depression and 543 controls were analyzed.
Inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis
factor-α), metabolic syndrome components, body mass index (BMI), saliva cortisol 
awakening curves (area under the curve with respect to the ground (AUCg) and with
respect to the increase (AUCi)), and diurnal cortisol slope were compared among
groups. Persons with melancholic depression had a higher AUCg and higher diurnal 
slope compared with persons with atypical depression and with controls. Persons
with atypical depression had significantly higher levels of inflammatory markers,
BMI, waist circumference and triglycerides, and lower high-density lipid
cholesterol than persons with melancholic depression and controls. This study
confirms that chronic forms of the two major subtypes of depression are
associated with different biological correlates with inflammatory and metabolic
dysregulation in atypical depression and HPA-axis hyperactivity in melancholic
depression. The data provide further evidence that chronic forms of depressive
subtypes differ not only in their symptom presentation, but also in their
biological correlates. These findings have important implications for future
research on pathophysiological pathways of depression and treatment.

PMID: 23089630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47387. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047387. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Non-motor symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease - correlations with
inflammatory cytokines in serum.

Lindqvist D(1), Kaufman E, Brundin L, Hall S, Surova Y, Hansson O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Section for Psychiatry, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden. Daniel.Lindqvist@med.lu.se

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's Disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative 
disorder of the central nervous system. Motor symptoms are the focus of
pharmacotherapy, yet non-motor features of the disease (e.g. fatigue, mood
disturbances, sleep disturbances and symptoms of anxiety) are both common and
disabling for the patient. The pathophysiological mechanisms behind the non-motor
symptoms in PD are yet to be untangled. The main objective of this study was to
investigate associations between pro-inflammatory substances and non-motor
symptoms in patients with PD.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We measured C-reactive protein, interleukin (IL)-6,
soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2R) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in blood
samples from PD patients (n=86) and healthy controls (n=40). Symptoms of fatigue,
depression, anxiety and sleeping difficulties were assessed using the Functional 
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy-Fatigue (FACIT), the Hospital Anxiety and
Depression Scale (HAD), and the Scales for Outcome in PD-Sleep Scale
respectively.
RESULTS: IL-6 was significantly higher in PD patients than in healthy controls.
Compared to healthy controls, PD patients displayed significantly higher mean
scores on HAD and lower scores on FACIT, thus indicating more severe symptoms as 
measured with these scales. Within the PD sample, high levels of both sIL-2R and 
TNF-α were significantly associated with more severe symptoms assessed by means
of FACIT and HAD (depression and anxiety subscales). SIL-2-R levels were able to 
significantly predict FACIT and HAD scores after the effects of age, gender,
anti-parkinsonian medications, and severity of motor symptoms were controlled
for.
DISCUSSION: We suggest that non-motor symptoms in PD patients, such as fatigue
and depressive symptoms, might be generated via inflammatory mechanisms. This
knowledge might contribute to the development of novel treatment options in PD,
specifically targeting non-motor symptoms.

PMCID: PMC3474801
PMID: 23082161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Ann Behav Med. 2013 Feb;45(1):121-31. doi: 10.1007/s12160-012-9428-8.

Cardiometabolic risk in adolescents: associations with physical activity,
fitness, and sleep.

Countryman AJ(1), Saab PG, Llabre MM, Penedo FJ, McCalla JR, Schneiderman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124-0751,
USA. amanda.countryman@gmail.com

Comment in
    Ann Behav Med. 2013 Dec;46(3):403-4.
    Ann Behav Med. 2013 Dec;46(3):401-2.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity and fitness are independently associated with
cardiometabolic dysfunction, and short sleep duration is an emerging marker of
obesity. Few have examined interrelations among these factors in a comprehensive 
risk model.
PURPOSE: Investigate the influence of behavioral and lifestyle risk factors on
the metabolic syndrome and inflammation.
METHODS: A sample of 367 15-17-year-olds (73 % boys) from ethnic minority groups 
(45.8 % Hispanic, 30.8 % Black), most with elevated blood pressure (72 %),
underwent aerobic fitness testing, blood sampling, and completed behavioral
questionnaires.
RESULTS: Structural model results are consistent with the notion that short sleep
duration, poor sleep quality and fatigue, and decreased physical activity are
associated with increased risk of metabolic syndrome and inflammation possibly
via effects on reduced cardiorespiratory fitness.
CONCLUSIONS: The combination of negative lifestyle and behavioral factors of
physical inactivity, sleep loss, and poor fitness has serious implications for
cardiovascular health complications in at-risk youth.

PMID: 23080394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jan;27(1):145-54. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.10.009. Epub
2012 Oct 16.

Workplace based mindfulness practice and inflammation: a randomized trial.

Malarkey WB(1), Jarjoura D, Klatt M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, The Ohio State University,
United States. william.malarkey@osumc.edu

We have developed a low dose Mindfulness-Based Intervention (MBI-ld) that reduces
the time committed to meetings and formal mindfulness practice, while conducting 
the sessions during the workday. This reduced the barriers commonly mentioned for
non-participation in mindfulness programs. In a controlled randomized trial we
studied university faculty and staff (n=186) who were found to have an elevated
CRP level,>3.0 mg/ml, and who either had, or were at risk for cardiovascular
disease. This study was designed to evaluate if MBI-ld could produce a greater
decrease in CRP, IL-6 and cortisol than an active control group receiving a
lifestyle education program when measured at the end of the 2 month
interventions. We found that MBI-ld significantly enhanced mindfulness by
2-months and it was maintained for up to a year when compared to the education
control. No significant changes were noted between interventions in cortisol,
IL-6 levels or self-reported measures of perceived stress, depression and sleep
quality at 2-months. Although not statistically significant (p=.08), the CRP
level at 2-months was one mg/ml lower in the MBI-ld group than in the education
control group, a change which may have clinical significance (Ridker et al.,
2000; Wassel et al., 2010). A larger MBI-ld effect on CRP (as compared to
control) occurred among participants who had a baseline BMI <30 (-2.67 mg/ml)
than for those with BMI >30 (-0.18 mg/ml). We conclude that MBI-ld should be more
fully investigated as a low-cost self-directed complementary strategy for
decreasing inflammation, and it seems most promising for non-obese subjects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3528077
PMID: 23078984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2012 Summer;24(3):354-66. doi:
10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11060142.

Effects of sleep deprivation on nocturnal cytokine concentrations in depressed
patients and healthy control subjects.

Voderholzer U(1), Fiebich BL, Dersch R, Feige B, Piosczyk H, Kopasz M, Riemann D,
Lieb K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. UVoderholzer@Schoen-Kliniken.de

Previous studies have reported alterations of cytokine and cytokine-receptor
concentrations in psychiatric patient populations, including patients with major 
depressive disorder (MDD). However, study results are conflicting, and possible
causes for these abnormalities are unknown. Since sleep deprivation may induce a 
rapid improvement of mood in depressed patients, the authors investigated the
impact of total sleep deprivation (TSD) for one night, and subsequent recovery
sleep, on nocturnal concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-1-receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), and soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2R) in
15 unmedicated patients with MDD and 16 healthy volunteers. Whereas IL-6 levels
normalized again during the recovery night in depressed patients, they were still
elevated in control subjects. Serum levels of IL-1RA were higher in depressed
patients than in controls, but were not affected by TSD. During recovery sleep,
IL-1RA levels increased as compared with the preceding TSD night only in
controls. Responders (N=8) differed from nonresponders (N=7) to TSD with regard
to IL-1RA, which increased significantly during TSD in responders only. Sleep
deprivation therefore seems to significantly affect cytokine levels in both
depressed patients and healthy subjects, but does so in different ways. Sleep
disturbances in depressed patients could account for the increased levels of
cytokines found in these patients in several previous studies. The interaction
between antidepressant effects of TSD and alterations of cytokines warrants
further investigation.

PMID: 23037650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2012 Jul;32(7):896-901.

[Study on the correlation between the inflammatory factors in the serum and the
induced sputum and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in advanced
lung adenocarcinoma of different syndromes].

[Article in Chinese]

Du YJ(1), Cao YX, Duan XH.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Integrative Medicine for Lung, Inflammation and Cancers, Huashan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai.

OBJECTIVE: To study the correlation between the inflammatory factors in the serum
and the induced sputum and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function
in advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients of different syndromes.
METHODS: Totally 71 patients with advanced lung adenocarcinoma were assigned to
three groups according to syndrome differentiation, i.e., Shen-yang deficiency
(SYD) group (28 cases), Fei-qi deficiency (FQD) group (23 cases), and yin
deficiency fire excess (YDFE) group (20 cases). Another 41 healthy subjects were 
enrolled as the normal control group. Sputum was induced and blood samples were
collected for measurement of cytokines including tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6),
and interferon gamma (INF-gamma). The cytokine assay was performed using Bio-Plex
Pro multi assay technology. 24-h collection of urine was performed and salivary
samples of the diurnal rhythm profiles [including urinary free cortisol (UFC),
urinary 17-hydroxycorticosteroids (17-OH), urinary 17-ketosteroid (17-KS), and
cortisol in the serum and saliva] were obtained for assessment of the HPA axis
activity.
RESULTS: A higher level of serum IL-6 and a lower level of 24-h UFC and 17-OH
were found in the SYD group (P < 0.05). The urinary 17-KS was obviously lower in 
the SYD group than in the normal control group and the YDEE group (P < 0.05).
Compared with the FQD group and the normal control group, a higher serum level of
TNF-alpha and a lower level of IFN-gamma were found in the SYD group and the YDFE
group (P < 0.05). The TNF-alpha and TGF-beta levels in the induced sputum
obviously increased in the SYD group (P < 0.05). The IFN-gamma level in the
induced sputum obviously decreased in the YDFE group (P < 0.05). The serum and
salivary cortisol obviously decreased from 8: 00 am to 8:00 am the next morning
in the SYD group (P < 0.05). The serum cortisol level was negatively correlated
with serum TNF-alpha (r = -0.26, P = 0.03) and serum IL-6 (r = -0.25, P = 0.03). 
The salivary cortisol level was negatively correlated with IL-6 in the induced
sputum (r = -0.29, P = 0.02). The serum IFN-gamma was positively correlated with 
urinary 17-OH (r = 0.21, P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The inflammatory factors of advanced lung adenocarcinoma patients of
SYD syndrome were up-regulated, with the most obvious decreased or disarranged
HPA axis functions. The levels of IL-6, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma were closely
correlated with the HPA axis functions. The transformation from qi deficiency,
yin deficiency to Shen-yang deficiency existed in lung adenocarcinoma patients.
The levels of IL-6, TNF-alpha, and IFN-gamma in the serum and the induced sputum,
as well as the HPA axis functions are important indices for microscopic syndrome 
typing of lung adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 23019942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Clin Rheumatol. 2012 Nov;31(11):1591-7. doi: 10.1007/s10067-012-2053-x. Epub 2012
Sep 5.

Effect of weight reduction on the quality of life in obese patients with
fibromyalgia syndrome: a randomized controlled trial.

Senna MK(1), Sallam RA, Ashour HS, Elarman M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Rehabilitation Department, Mansoura Faculty of Medicine,
Mansoura, Egypt.

The aim of the study was to examine whether weight reduction can result in
improvement of fibromyalgia impact questionnaire (FIQ) in the patients with
fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS). This study was a randomized controlled trial. Obese 
patients with fibromyalgia were randomly assigned to 6-month dietary weight loss 
(n = 41) and no weight loss (n = 42) groups. Patients were assessed at baseline
and at 6 months. The primary outcome measure was FIQ. Secondary measures included
the tender point (TP) examination, Beck Depression Inventory-II, and Pittsburg
Sleep Quality Index. Compared to the control group, patients who underwent weight
reduction obtained significantly better FIQ (p = 0.007), lower mean TP count
(p = 0.015), and lower mean TP pain rating in the lower body (p < 0.001).
Patients who lost weight had less depression and better sleep quality than the
controls. Patients who lost weight had significantly lower interleukin 6 and
C-reactive protein levels than those in the control group (p = 0.034 and
p = 0.007, respectively). Weight loss in obese patients with FMS leads to
significant improvement in the quality of life as shown by the decrease in the
FIQ score. Depression, sleep quality, and tender point count are also
significantly improved by weight loss in obese patients with fibromyalgia. Our
results suggest that weight reduction should be a part of fibromyalgia treatment.

PMID: 22948223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Sleep Breath. 2014 May;18(2):251-6. doi: 10.1007/s11325-012-0761-8. Epub 2012 Sep
4.

Influence of CPAP treatment on airway and systemic inflammation in OSAS patients.

Karamanlı H(1), Özol D, Ugur KS, Yıldırım Z, Armutçu F, Bozkurt B, Yigitoglu R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Fatih University Medical School, Ankara,
Turkey.

AIM: Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is characterized by recurrent
respiratory disorders in the upper airways during sleep. Although continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) has been accepted to be the most effective
treatment for OSAS, its role on inflammation remains debatable. In this study,
our aim was to examine the influence of 3 months of CPAP treatment on tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin-6 (IL-6), 8-isoprostane, and
peroxynitrite levels in exhaled breathing condensates (EBC) and serum.
METHODS: Thirty-five patients who were newly diagnosed as moderate or severe OSAS
with full night polysomnography and used CPAP therapy regularly for 3 months were
included in the study. Polysomnography, spirometric tests, fasting blood samples,
and EBC were ascertained on entry into the study and after 3 months of treatment.
All patients were assessed monthly for treatment adherence and side effects.
RESULTS: We found that all polysomnographic parameters were normalized after CPAP
therapy in the control polysomnogram. Also, all markers in EBC and nitrotyrosine 
and 8-isoprostane levels in serum were decreased significantly with CPAP
treatment. Sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, IL-6, and TNF-α remained
unchanged in serum after treatment. We found that baseline nitrotyrosine levels
were significantly correlated with apnea-hypopnea index, oxygen desaturation
index, and percent time in SpO2 < 90 % (p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: CPAP therapy has primarily a relevant impact on airways, and
nitrotyrosine levels correlated well with severity of OSAS. This treatment
decreases both inflammation and oxidative stress levels in airways in OSAS
patients. Also, this treatment helps to decrease systemic oxidative stress levels
in serum.

PMID: 22945540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jul;31:48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.08.007. Epub 2012
Aug 19.

Elevated ratio of arachidonic acid to long-chain omega-3 fatty acids predicts
depression development following interferon-alpha treatment: relationship with
interleukin-6.

Lotrich FE(1), Sears B, McNamara RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. lotrichfe@upmc.edu

Cross-sectional studies have found that an elevated ratio of arachidonic acid to 
omega-3 fatty acid is associated with depression, and controlled intervention
studies have found that decreasing this ratio through administration of omega-3
fatty acids can alleviate depressive symptoms. Additionally, arachidonic acid and
omega-3 fatty acids have opposing effects on inflammatory signaling. Exogenous
administration of the inflammatory cytokine interferon-alpha (IFN-α) can trigger 
a depressive episode in a subset of vulnerable people, though associated risk
factors remain poorly understood. Using a within-subject prospective design of
138 subjects, we examined whether baseline long-chain omega-3 (docosahexaenoic
acid - DHA; eicosapentaenoic acid - EPA) and omega-6 (arachidonic acid - AA;
di-homo-gamma-linolenic acid - DGLA) fatty acid status was associated with
depression vulnerability in hepatitis C patients treated with IFN-α. Based on the
literature, we had specific a priori interest in the AA/EPA+DHA ratio. Lower
baseline DHA predicted depression incidence (p=0.04), as did elevated DGLA
(p=0.02) and an elevated AA/EPA+DHA ratio (p=0.007). The AA/EPA+DHA ratio
predicted depression even when controlling for other critical variables such as
sleep quality and race. A higher AA/EPA+DHA ratio was positively associated with 
both increasing Montgomery-Asperg Depression Rating Scores over time (F=4.0;
p<0.05) as well as interleukin-6 levels (F=107.4; p<0.05) but not C-reactive
protein. Importantly, omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acid status was not associated
with sustained viral response to IFN-α treatment. These prospective data support 
the role of fatty acid status in depression vulnerability and indicate a
potential role for omega-3 fatty acids in the prevention of inflammation-induced 
depression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3552059
PMID: 22926083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Mar;30 Suppl:S126-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.07.022.
Epub 2012 Aug 5.

Cortisol and inflammatory processes in ovarian cancer patients following primary 
treatment: relationships with depression, fatigue, and disability.

Schrepf A(1), Clevenger L, Christensen D, DeGeest K, Bender D, Ahmed A, Goodheart
MJ, Dahmoush L, Penedo F, Lucci JA 3rd, Ganjei-Azar P, Mendez L, Markon K,
Lubaroff DM, Thaker PH, Slavich GM, Sood AK, Lutgendorf SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Elevations in the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) and alterations 
in the anti-inflammatory hormone cortisol have been reported in a variety of
cancers. IL-6 has prognostic significance in ovarian cancer and cortisol has been
associated with fatigue, disability, and vegetative depression in ovarian cancer 
patients prior to surgery. Ovarian cancer patients undergoing primary treatment
completed psychological self-report measures and collected salivary cortisol and 
plasma IL-6 prior to surgery, at 6 months, and at 1 year. Patients included in
this study had completed chemotherapy and had no evidence of disease recurrence. 
At 6 months, patients showed significant reductions in nocturnal cortisol
secretion, plasma IL-6, and a more normalized diurnal cortisol rhythm, changes
that were maintained at 1 year. The reductions in IL-6 and nocturnal cortisol
were associated with declines in self-reported fatigue, vegetative depression,
and disability. These findings suggest that primary treatment for ovarian cancer 
reduces the inflammatory response. Moreover, patients who have not developed
recurrent disease by 1 year appear to maintain more normalized levels of cortisol
and IL-6. Improvement in fatigue and vegetative depression is associated with the
normalization of IL-6 and cortisol, a pattern which may be relevant for
improvements in overall quality of life for ovarian cancer patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3697797
PMID: 22884960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2012 Jul;1261:88-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2012.06634.x.

Role of interleukin-6 in stress, sleep, and fatigue.

Rohleder N(1), Aringer M, Boentert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Volen National Center for Complex Systems,
Brandeis University, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA. rohleder@brandeis.edu

Chronic low-grade inflammation, in particular increased concentrations of
proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-6 in the circulation, is
observed with increasing age, but it is also as a consequence of various medical 
and psychological conditions, as well as life-style choices. Since molecules such
as IL-6 have pleiotropic effects, consequences are wide ranging. This short
review summarizes the evidence showing how IL-6 elevations in the context of
inflammatory disease affect the organism, with a focus on sleep-related symptoms 
and fatigue; and conversely, how alterations in sleep duration and quality
stimulate increased concentrations of IL-6 in the circulation. Research showing
that acute as well as chronic psychological stress also increase concentrations
of IL-6 supports the notion of a close link between an organism's response to
physiological and psychological perturbations. The findings summarized here
further underscore the particular importance of IL-6 as a messenger molecule that
connects peripheral regulatory processes with the CNS.

© 2012 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 22823398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jan;27(1):38-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.07.001. Epub
2012 Jul 13.

The diurnal patterns of salivary interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein in healthy 
young adults.

Izawa S(1), Miki K, Liu X, Ogawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Health Administration and Psychosocial Factor Research Group, National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health, Kanagawa, Japan. izawa0810@gmail.com

In recent years, salivary inflammatory markers, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and 
C-reactive protein (CRP), have been investigated regarding their relationships
with psychosocial stress and stress-related diseases. This study investigated the
diurnal patterns of salivary IL-6 and CRP in healthy young adults. Twenty-seven
students (11 males and 16 females) participated in this study. The participants
were instructed to provide saliva samples 8 times a day (at 0700, 0730, 1000,
1300, 1600, 1900, 2200, and 0100 h). For the duration of study, they were asked
to wake up at 0700 h and go to bed after 0100 h. Twelve of the participants were 
asked to repeat this sampling procedure on two consecutive days to test the
stability of the diurnal patterns. The salivary IL-6 levels peaked at awakening, 
gradually declined from morning to noon, and peaked again at midnight, before the
participants went to sleep. The salivary CRP levels peaked at awakening, and they
were lower during the daytime. The salivary IL-6 and CRP levels exhibited
moderate to high stability over 2 days of sample collection. This study revealed 
that the salivary inflammatory markers had distinctive diurnal patterns.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22796263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2012 Dec;44(12):2290-8. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e318267b209.

Basal, circadian, and acute inflammation in normal versus overweight men.

Miles MP(1), Keller JM, Kordick LK, Kidd JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health and Human Development, Montana State University, Bozeman,
MT 59717, USA. mmiles@montana.edu

Increased inflammation is present in obese compared with normal weight
individuals, but inflammation characteristics of nonobese, overweight individuals
are less clear.PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to determine whether
basal, circadian, and posteccentric exercise inflammation levels differ between
normal and overweight men.
METHODS: Men (18-35 yr old) classified as normal weight (body mass index ≤25
kg·m, n = 20) and overweight (body mass index = 25-30 kg·m, n = 10) completed
exercise (EX) and control (CON) conditions in random order. Maximal voluntary
effort and eccentric actions (3 × 15) using the elbow flexor muscles of one arm
were performed, and blood was collected preexercise and 4, 8, 12, and 24 h
postexercise at 7:00 a.m., 12:00 p.m., 4:00 p.m., 8:00 p.m., and 7:00 a.m. Blood 
was collected on a time-matched schedule without exercise for CON. Soluble tumor 
necrosis factor receptor-1, interleukin-6, C-reactive protein (CRP), and cortisol
responses (EX value - time-matched CON value) were measured.
RESULTS: Basal CRP was higher in the overweight compared with normal weight group
(mean ± SD, 0.542 ± 0.578 vs 1.395 ± 1.041 mg·L). Soluble tumor necrosis factor
receptor-1 increased (P < 0.05) 8 h postexercise in both groups, and the response
was greater 12 and 24 h postexercise in the overweight compared with normal
weight groups. Interleukin-6 increased (P < 0.05) 8 h postexercise, with a trend 
(P = 0.09) to be greater in the overweight group. CRP and cortisol responses were
not detected.
CONCLUSIONS: The low-grade inflammation state in overweight compared with normal 
weight men includes both higher basal CRP concentrations and enhanced acute
inflammation, but not in changes to the circadian patterns of cortisol and
inflammation variables.

PMID: 22776879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Sleep Breath. 2013 May;17(2):505-10. doi: 10.1007/s11325-012-0729-8. Epub 2012
Jun 20.

Does physical exercise reduce excessive daytime sleepiness by improving
inflammatory profiles in obstructive sleep apnea patients?

Alves Eda S(1), Ackel-D'Elia C, Luz GP, Cunha TC, Carneiro G, Tufik S,
Bittencourt LR, de Mello MT.

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Medicina e Biologia do Sono, Departamento de Psicobiologia,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo-UNIFESP, São Paulo, CEP: 04020-050, Brazil.

INTRODUCTION: Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is associated with a
variety of long-term consequences such as high rates of morbidity and mortality, 
due to excessive diurnal somnolence as well as cardiovascular and metabolic
diseases. Obesity, recurrent episodes of upper airway obstruction, progressive
hypoxemia, and sleep fragmentation during sleep cause neural, cardiovascular, and
metabolic changes. These changes include activation of peripheral sympathetic
nervous system and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, insulin sensitivity, 
and inflammatory cytokines alterations, which predispose an individual to
vascular damage.
DISCUSSION: Previous studies proposed that OSAS modulated the expression and
secretion of inflammatory cytokines from fat and other tissues. Independent of
obesity, patients with OSAS exhibited elevated levels of C-reactive protein,
tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-6, which are associated with sleepiness, 
fatigue, and the development of a variety of metabolic and cardiovascular
diseases. OSAS and obesity are strongly associated with each other and share many
common pathways that induce chronic inflammation. Previous studies suggested that
the protective effect of exercise may be partially attributed to the
anti-inflammatory effect of regular exercise, and this effect was observed in
obese patients. Although some studies assessed the effects of physical exercise
on objective and subjective sleep parameters, the quality of life, and mood in
patients with OSAS, no study has evaluated the effects of this treatment on
inflammatory profiles. In this review, we cited some studies that directed our
opinion to believe that since OSAS causes increased inflammation and has
excessive daytime sleepiness as a symptom and being that physical exercise
improves inflammatory profiles and possibly OSAS symptoms, it must be that
physical exercise improves excessive daytime sleepiness due to its improvement in
inflammatory profiles.

PMID: 22760814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Sleep. 2012 Jul 1;35(7):921-32. doi: 10.5665/sleep.1952.

The interaction of obstructive sleep apnea and obesity on the inflammatory
markers C-reactive protein and interleukin-6: the Icelandic Sleep Apnea Cohort.

Arnardottir ES(1), Maislin G, Schwab RJ, Staley B, Benediktsdottir B, Olafsson I,
Juliusson S, Romer M, Gislason T, Pack AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Sleep, Landspitali-The National
University Hospital of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To assess the relative roles and interaction of obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA) severity and obesity on interleukin-6 (IL-6) and C-reactive
protein (CRP) levels.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional cohort.
SETTING: The Icelandic Sleep Apnea Cohort.
PARTICIPANTS: 454 untreated OSA patients (380 males and 74 females), mean ±
standard deviation age 54.4 ± 10.6 yr.
INTERVENTIONS: N/A.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Participants underwent a sleep study, abdominal
magnetic resonance imaging to measure total abdominal and visceral fat volume,
and had fasting morning IL-6 and CRP levels measured in serum. A significantly
higher correlation was found for BMI than visceral fat volume with CRP and IL-6
levels. Oxygen desaturation index, hypoxia time, and minimum oxygen saturation
(SaO₂) significantly correlated with IL-6 and CRP levels, but apnea-hypopnea
index did not. When stratified by body mass index (BMI) category, OSA severity
was associated with IL-6 levels in obese participants only (BMI > 30 kg/m²). A
multiple linear regression model with interaction terms showed an independent
association of OSA severity with IL-6 levels and an interaction between OSA
severity and BMI, i.e., degree of obesity altered the relationship between OSA
and IL-6 levels. An independent association of OSA severity with CRP levels was
found for minimum SaO₂ only. A similar interaction of OSA severity and BMI on CRP
levels was found for males and postmenopausal women.
CONCLUSIONS: OSA severity is an independent predictor of levels of IL-6 and CRP
but interacts with obesity such that this association is found only in obese
patients.

PMCID: PMC3369227
PMID: 22754038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Nov;26(8):1239-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.06.003. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

Elevated C-reactive protein is associated with severe periodic leg movements of
sleep in patients with restless legs syndrome.

Trotti LM(1), Rye DB, De Staercke C, Hooper WC, Quyyumi A, Bliwise DL.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Program in Sleep, Department of Neurology, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA. Lbecke2@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a common sleep disorder in which
urges to move the legs are felt during rest, are felt at night, and are improved 
by leg movement. RLS has been implicated in the development of cardiovascular
disease. Periodic leg movements (PLMs) may be a mediator of this relationship. We
evaluated systemic inflammation and PLMs in RLS patients to further assess
cardiovascular risk.
METHODS: 137 RLS patients had PLM measurements taken while unmedicated for RLS.
Banked plasma was assayed for high sensitivity C-reactive protein (CRP),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha).
RESULTS: Mean (SD) PLM index was 19.3 (22.0). PLMs were unrelated to TNF-a and
IL-6, but were modestly correlated with logCRP (r(129)=0.19, p=0.03). Those
patients with at least 45PLMs/h had an odds ratio of 3.56 (95% CI 1.26-10.03,
p=0.02, df=1) for having elevated CRP compared to those with fewer than 45PLMs/h.
After adjustment for age, race, gender, diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
inflammatory disorders, CRP-lowering medications, and body mass index, the OR for
those with ≥ 45PLMs/h was 8.60 (95% CI 1.23 to 60.17, p=0.03, df=10).
CONCLUSIONS: PLMs are associated with increased inflammation, such that those RLS
patients with at least 45PLMs/h had more than triple the odds of elevated CRP
than those with fewer PLMs. Further investigation into PLMs and inflammation is
warranted.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3468666
PMID: 22750520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Sleep Res. 2013 Feb;22(1):70-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2012.01030.x. Epub
2012 Jun 20.

Exenatide improves excessive daytime sleepiness and wakefulness in obese patients
with type 2 diabetes without obstructive sleep apnoea.

Idris I(1), Abdulla H, Tilbrook S, Dean R, Ali N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Sherwood Forest Hospitals Foundation
Trust, Nottinghamshire, UK. iidris@aol.com

We investigate the effects of exenatide on excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS),
driving performance and depression score in patients with type 2 diabetes with
EDS. Eight obese patients with diabetes but without obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA) participated in a placebo-controlled single-blind study during which
multiple wakefulness and sleep latency test, Epworth score, driving performance, 
depression score, fasting glucose and glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) levels were
assessed at baseline, end of placebo and treatment phase at baseline and after
22 weeks of treatment. Mean (±standard error of the mean) age, body mass index
(kg m(2) ) and HbA1c [mmol mol(-1) (%)] of patients at baseline were
50 ± 4.9 years, 37.6 ± 1.1 and 65 ± 19 (8.06 ± 0.41), respectively. When compared
to placebo, exenatide treatment was associated with a decrease in both subjective
and objective sleepiness, based on the Epworth score reduction and the sleep
latency increase assessed by multiple objective sleepiness and sustained
attention (OSLER) tests, respectively. Mean sleep latency time (adjusted for
change in HbA1c and weight) were 32.1 ± 1.7, 29.1 ± 1.7 and 37.7 ± 1.7,
respectively (P = 0.002). Modelling for covariates suggested that improvement in 
mean sleep latency time is predicted by changes in weight (P = 0.003), but not by
changes in HbA1c (P = 0.054). Epworth sleepiness score was reduced significantly 
(values for placebo versus exenatide: 11.3 ± 1.2 versus 5.7 ± 1.3; P = 0.003). No
significant change was noted in the depression score and driving performance.
Exenatide is associated with a significant reduction in objective sleepiness in
obese patients with type 2 diabetes without OSA, independent of HbA1c levels.
These findings could form a basis for further studies to investigate the
pathophysiological mechanisms of sleepiness in obese patients with type 2
diabetes.

© 2012 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 22716195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Aug 15;303(4):L279-85. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00361.2011. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Critical role for integrin-β4 in the attenuation of murine acute lung injury by
simvastatin.

Chen W(1), Sammani S, Mitra S, Ma SF, Garcia JG, Jacobson JR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Personalized Respiratory Medicine, Section of Pulmonary,
Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA.

The statins are a class of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A-reductase
inhibitors that are recognized to have pleiotropic properties. We previously
reported the attenuation of LPS-induced murine acute lung injury (ALI) by
simvastatin in vivo and identified relevant effects of simvastatin on endothelial
cell (EC) signaling, activation, and barrier function in vitro. In particular,
simvastatin induces the upregulation of integrin-β4, which in turn inhibits EC
inflammatory responses via attenuation of MAPK signaling. The role of integrin-β4
in murine ALI protection by simvastatin, however, is unknown. We initially
confirmed a time- and dose-dependent effect of simvastatin on increased
integrin-β4 mRNA expression in human lung EC with peak protein expression evident
at 16 h. Subsequently, reciprocal immunoprecipitation demonstrated an attenuation
of LPS-induced integrin-β4 tyrosine phosphorylation by simvastatin (5 μM, 16 h). 
Increased expression of EC inflammatory cytokines [IL-6, IL-8, monocyte
chemoattractant protein (MCP)-1, regulated on activation normal T cell expressed 
and secreted (RANTES)] by LPS (500 ng/ml, 4 h) was also significantly attenuated 
by simvastatin pretreatment (5 μM, 16 h), but this effect was reversed by
cotreatment with an integrin-β4-blocking antibody. Finally, although simvastatin 
(20 mg/kg) conferred significant protection in murine ALI as evidenced by
decreased bronchoalveolar lavage fluid cell counts, protein, inflammatory
cytokines (IL-6, IL-1β, MCP-1, RANTES), decreased Evans blue dye albumin
extravasation in lung tissue, and changes on lung histology, these effects were
reversed by the integrin-β4-blocking antibody (IV, 1 mg/kg, 2 h before LPS).
These findings support integrin-β4 as an important mediator of ALI protection by 
simvastatin and implicate signaling by integrin-β4 as a novel therapeutic target 
in patients with ALI.

PMCID: PMC3423831
PMID: 22683568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2013 Jan;113(1):241-8. doi: 10.1007/s00421-012-2432-7. Epub
2012 Jun 8.

Effect of time of day and partial sleep deprivation on plasma concentrations of
IL-6 during a short-term maximal performance.

Abedelmalek S(1), Chtourou H, Aloui A, Aouichaoui C, Souissi N, Tabka Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, Sousse, Tunisia.

The present study was designed to evaluate the effect of time of day and partial 
sleep deprivation (PSD) on short-term maximal performance and level of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) in trained subjects. In a randomized order, 12 football
players were asked to perform a 30-s Wingate test during which we measured the
peak (PP) and mean (MP) powers. Measurements were performed at 0800 and 1800
hours, after two nocturnal regimens: (1) a reference normal sleep night (RN) and 
(2) 4 h of PSD caused by an early awakening. Plasma IL-6 concentrations were
measured before (P1), immediately after (P2), and 60 min after the exercise (P3).
PP and MP improved significantly from the morning to the afternoon after RN (P < 
0.05) and from the afternoon to the morning after PSD (P < 0.05). Compared to RN,
PP and MP were not affected by PSD the following morning. However, there was a
significant decrease in PP and MP (P < 0.001) after the PSD at 1800 hours. In all
conditions, IL-6 and resting core temperature were significantly higher (P <
0.05) in the afternoon than in the morning. In all sessions, IL-6 levels
increased significantly from P1 to P2 (P < 0.01) and remained elevated in the
afternoon during the recovery period after PSD (P < 0.05). However, no
significant difference was observed in IL-6 between P1 and P3 during RN and PSD
at 0800 hours. In conclusion, a short-term high-intensity exercise may increase
the IL-6 concentrations in the morning and the afternoon. Moreover, IL-6 remained
elevated during the recovery period in the afternoon after the PSD at the end of 
the night.

PMID: 22677919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Sleep Breath. 2013 May;17(2):597-604. doi: 10.1007/s11325-012-0726-y. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

Analysis of systemic and airway inflammation in obstructive sleep apnea.

Aihara K(1), Oga T, Chihara Y, Harada Y, Tanizawa K, Handa T, Hitomi T, Uno K,
Mishima M, Chin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

PURPOSE: The presence of both systemic and airway inflammation has been suggested
in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) by increased levels of inflammatory biomarkers
in the circulation and respiratory specimens. We aimed to investigate the
relationship between systemic and airway inflammation in OSA.
METHODS: This study was conducted by simultaneously measuring various biomarkers 
both in serum and induced sputum of 43 patients. We compared the relationships of
these biomarker levels with polysomnographic data and obesity measurements and
also investigated their interrelationships between systemic and local
compartments. We also assessed the relation of inflammatory markers with proximal
airway resistance measured by impulse oscillometry.
RESULTS: In multiple regression analyses, each measured serum biomarker [leptin, 
interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)] significantly correlated with waist
circumference or fat area determined by computed tomography. In contrast,
regarding airway inflammation, sputum IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, and VEGF significantly
correlated with OSA severity as indicated by the respiratory disturbance index or
oxygen desaturation indices. Sputum IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, and VEGF were
significantly related to sputum neutrophil number, and sputum IL-8 and TNF-α were
related to proximal airway resistance independently of body mass index. There
were no significant interrelationships between the same biomarkers in serum and
induced sputum.
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic and airway inflammation in OSA might be differently
regulated by OSA itself and comorbid obesity, depending on the type of cytokine. 
Although we did not find apparent interrelationships between systemic and local
compartments, further studies are needed to clarify this concept.

PMID: 22674397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Chronobiol Int. 2012 Jun;29(5):587-94. doi: 10.3109/07420528.2012.675847.

Adipokine levels are altered by shiftwork: a preliminary study.

Crispim CA(1), Padilha HG, Zimberg IZ, Waterhouse J, Dattilo M, Tufik S, de Mello
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
Brazil.

Shiftwork is often associated with metabolic diseases, and in the past few years,
several cytokines have been postulated to contribute to various diseases,
including insulin resistance. The aim of this study was to compare the
concentrations of adiponectin, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and interleukin-6
(IL-6) in samples of young adult men exposed to a fixed (i) night shift (n = 9), 
working from 22:00 to 06:00 h; (ii) early morning shift (n = 6), working from
06:00 to 14:00 h; and (iii) day shift (n = 7), working from 08:00 to 17:00 h. The
fixed night-shift and early-morning-shift samples were considered collectively as
a shiftworker group given their work times. Blood samples were collected during
the regular working day at 4-h intervals over the course of 24 h, thus totaling
six samples. Morphological and physical activity parameters did not differ
between the three groups. Total energy intake was lowest on the early morning
shifts (p < .03). Both shiftworker groups ingested a significantly higher
percentage of fat (p < .003) and a lower percentage of carbohydrate (p < .0005)
than the day group. The early morning group had a lower mean 24-h level of
adiponectin than the other two groups (p = .016), and both the early morning and 
night groups exhibited higher mean 24-h levels of TNF-α than the day group (p
= .0001). The 24-h mean levels of IL-6 did not differ significantly between the
groups (p = .147). None of the groups exhibited a significant circadian effect on
adiponectin (p = .829), TNF-α (p = .779), or IL-6 (p = .979) levels. These
results indicate that individuals who are enrolled in shiftwork are susceptible
to alterations in the secretion of cytokines that are involved in insulin
resistance and cardiovascular disease, both of which are known to affect this
population.

PMID: 22621355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 6;287(28):23479-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.320960. Epub 2012
May 21.

Oxidatively modified low density lipoprotein (LDL) inhibits TLR2 and TLR4
cytokine responses in human monocytes but not in macrophages.

Kannan Y(1), Sundaram K, Aluganti Narasimhulu C, Parthasarathy S, Wewers MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, The Ohio
State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Inflammation characterized by the expression and release of cytokines and
chemokines is implicated in the development and progression of atherosclerosis.
Oxidatively modified low density lipoproteins, central to the formation of
atherosclerotic plaques, have been reported to signal through Toll-like receptors
(TLRs), TLR4 and TLR2, in concert with scavenger receptors to regulate the
inflammatory microenvironment in atherosclerosis. This study evaluates the role
of low density lipoproteins (LDL) and oxidatively modified LDL (oxmLDL) in the
expression and release of proinflammatory mediators IκBζ, IL-6, IL-1β, TNFα, and 
IL-8 in human monocytes and macrophages. Although standard LDL preparations
induced IκBζ along with IL-6 and IL-8 production, this inflammatory effect was
eliminated when LDL was isolated under endotoxin-restricted conditions. However, 
when added with TLR4 and TLR2 ligands, this low endotoxin preparation of oxmLDL
suppressed the expression and release of IL-1β, IL-6, and TNFα but surprisingly
spared IL-8 production. The suppressive effect of oxmLDL was specific to
monocytes as it did not inhibit LPS-induced proinflammatory cytokines in human
macrophages. Thus, TLR ligand contamination of LDL/oxmLDL preparations can
complicate interpretations of inflammatory responses to these modified
lipoproteins. In contrast to providing a proinflammatory function, oxmLDL
suppresses the expression and release of selected proinflammatory mediators.

PMCID: PMC3390624
PMID: 22613713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Aug;26(6):859-65. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.04.005. Epub
2012 Apr 25.

Early life stress and inflammatory mechanisms of fatigue in the Coronary Artery
Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) study.

Cho HJ(1), Bower JE, Kiefe CI, Seeman TE, Irwin MR.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and
Human Behavior, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. hjcho@mednet.ucla.edu

Fatigue is highly prevalent and causes serious disruption in quality of life.
Although cross-sectional studies suggest childhood adversity is associated with
adulthood fatigue, longitudinal evidence of this relationship and its specific
biological mechanisms have not been established. This longitudinal study examined
the association between early life stress and adulthood fatigue and tested
whether this association was mediated by low-grade systemic inflammation as
indexed by circulating C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). In the 
Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) study, a
population-based longitudinal study conducted in 4 US cities, early life stress
was retrospectively assessed in 2716 African-American and white adults using the 
Risky Families Questionnaire at Year 15 examination (2000-2001, ages 33-45
years). Fatigue as indexed by a loss of subjective vitality using the Vitality
Subscale of the 12-item Short Form Health Survey was assessed at both Years 15
and 20. While CRP was measured at both Years 15 and 20, IL-6 was measured only at
Year 20. Early life stress assessed at Year 15 was associated with adulthood
fatigue at Year 20 after adjustment for sociodemographic characteristics,
body-mass index, medication use, medical comorbidity, smoking, alcohol
consumption, physical activity, current stress, pain, sleep disturbance as well
as Year 15 fatigue (adjusted beta 0.047, P=0.007). However, neither CRP nor IL-6 
was a significant mediator of this association. In summary, early life stress
assessed in adulthood was associated with fatigue 5 years later, but this
association was not mediated by low-grade systemic inflammation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3398216
PMID: 22554493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Oct;26(7):1037-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.04.003. Epub
2012 Apr 21.

Sleep disturbance, cytokines, and fatigue in women with ovarian cancer.

Clevenger L(1), Schrepf A, Christensen D, DeGeest K, Bender D, Ahmed A, Goodheart
MJ, Penedo F, Lubaroff DM, Sood AK, Lutgendorf SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, United
States.

Pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), have been implicated in
the underlying processes contributing to sleep regulation and fatigue. Despite
evidence for sleep difficulties, fatigue, and elevations in IL-6 among women with
ovarian cancer, the association between these symptoms and IL-6 has not been
investigated. To address this knowledge gap, we examined relationships between
sleep disturbance, fatigue, and plasma IL-6 in 136 women with ovarian cancer
prior to surgery. These relationships were also examined in 63 of these women who
were disease-free and not receiving chemotherapy one year post-diagnosis. At both
time-points, higher levels of IL-6 were significantly associated with sleep
disturbances (p<0.05), controlling for potentially confounding biological and
psychosocial covariates. Higher IL-6 was significantly associated with fatigue
prior to surgery (p<0.05); however, when sleep disturbance was included in the
model, the relationship was no longer significant. IL-6 was not significantly
associated with fatigue at one year. Changes in sleep over time were
significantly associated with percent change in IL-6 from pre-surgery to one
year, adjusting for covariates (p<0.05). These findings support a direct
association of IL-6 with sleep disturbances in this population, whereas the
relationship between IL-6 and fatigue prior to surgery may be mediated by poor
sleep. As this study is the first to examine cytokine contributions to sleep and 
fatigue in ovarian cancer, further research is warranted to clarify the role of
biological correlates of sleep and fatigue in this population.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3434312
PMID: 22543257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Sleep Breath. 2013 Mar;17(1):403-9. doi: 10.1007/s11325-012-0708-0. Epub 2012 Apr
24.

Insulin resistance and adipose-derived hormones in young men with untreated
obstructive sleep apnea.

Hargens TA(1), Guill SG, Kaleth AS, Nickols-Richardson SM, Miller LE, Zedalis D, 
Gregg JM, Gwazdauskas F, Herbert WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA, USA.
hargenta@jmu.edu

PURPOSE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) increases the risk for insulin resistance 
(IR). The mechanisms that link the two are not clear and are frequently
confounded by obesity. OSA is associated with alterations in adipose-derived
hormones (adipokines) that increase IR; however, previous studies have focused on
middle-aged and older adults. The objective of this study was to determine if IR 
and alterations in adipokines exist in young men with OSA, independent of
obesity.
METHODS: Subjects were assigned into the following groups based on body mass
index and presence of OSA: obese with OSA (OSA, n = 12), obese without OSA (NOSA,
n = 18), and normal weight without OSA (CON, n = 15). Fasting blood was obtained 
for batch analysis of biomarkers of IR. The homeostasis model assessment (HOMA)
method was used to assess IR.
RESULTS: HOMA and leptin were higher in the OSA group than the CON group. There
were no differences in insulin, tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) between the OSA and NOSA groups. Adiponectin was lower in
the OSA group vs. NOSA and CON; however, when controlled for central abdominal
fat (CAF), the difference was nullified. When controlled for total body
adiposity, however, CAF was 24 % higher in the subjects with OSA vs. subjects
without OSA.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that excess CAF in young men with OSA may
contribute to risk for type 2 diabetes indirectly by a degree that would
otherwise not be reached through obesity, although further research is needed.

PMID: 22528956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Inflammation. 2012 Aug;35(4):1507-11. doi: 10.1007/s10753-012-9464-3.

High levels of inflammation and insulin resistance in obstructive sleep apnea
patients with hypertension.

Qian X(1), Yin T, Li T, Kang C, Guo R, Sun B, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Respiratory Disease, General Hospital of People's
Liberation Army, No. 28 Fu Xing Road, Beijing, People's Republic of China,
100853. qianxs@yahoo.com

Hypertension induced by obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) may be multifactorial in
origin, and systemic inflammation is one of the major factors. However, OSA
patients do not always have the identical probability with hypertension even in
patients with the same history and degree of OSA. The aim of this study was to
compare the levels of inflammation and insulin resistance in two groups of
patients who had the same degree as well as the same long history of OSA, but
with/without hypertension. OSA patients (Apnea Hyponea Index, AHI ≥ 40/h, n = 70)
were examined by polysomnography and blood analysis for the measurements of
fasting plasma glucose, serum insulin (FINS), high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
(CRP), peptide C,TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-10. Patients with hypertension (n = 40) had 
higher level of LDL-C and lower HDL-C levels than patients without hypertension. 
Almost half (16/40) of OSA patients with hypertension had family history of
hypertension. Moreover in OSA patients with hypertension, the levels of TNF-α,
IL-6, and CRP were higher, but IL-10 was lower than those without hypertension.
FINS, peptide C, HOMA-IR, and HOMA-islet were also higher in OSA patients with
hypertension. OSA patients with hypertension have higher level of inflammation
and insulin resistance. Systemic inflammation and insulin resistance are both
important factors for the development of hypertension in OSA patients.

PMID: 22527145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Psychooncology. 2012 Jun;21(6):588-93. doi: 10.1002/pon.3067. Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Mind matters in cancer survival.

Spiegel D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
dspiegel@stanford.edu

OBJECTIVE: The very name "psycho-oncology" implies interaction between brain and 
body. One of the most intriguing scientific questions for the field is whether or
not living better may also mean living longer.
METHODS: Randomized intervention trials examining this question will be reviewed.
RESULTS: The majority show a survival advantage for patients randomized to
psychologically effective interventions for individuals with a variety of
cancers, including breast, melanoma, gastrointestinal, lymphoma, and lung
cancers. Importantly, for breast and other cancers, when aggressive anti-tumor
treatments are less effective, supportive approaches appear to become more
useful. This is highlighted by a recent randomized clinical trial of palliative
care for non-small cell lung cancer patients.There is growing evidence that
disruption of circadian rhythms, including rest-activity patterns and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis function, affects cancer risk and
progression. Women with metastatic breast cancer have flatter diurnal cortisol
patterns than normal, and the degree of loss of daily variation in cortisol
predicts earlier mortality. Mechanisms by which abnormal cortisol patterns affect
metabolism, gene expression, and immune function are reviewed. The HPA
hyperactivity associated with depression can produce elevated levels of cytokines
that affect the brain. Tumor cells can, in turn, co-opt certain mediators of
inflammation such as NFkB, interleukin-6, and angiogenic factors to promote
metastasis. Also, exposure to elevated levels of norepinephrine triggers release 
of vascular endothelial growth factor, which facilitates tumor growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Therefore, the stress of advancing cancer and management of it is
associated with endocrine, immune, and autonomic dysfunction that has
consequences for host resistance to cancer progression.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3370072
PMID: 22438289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Jul;26(5):706-13. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.02.001. Epub
2012 Mar 2.

Fatigue and sleep quality are associated with changes in inflammatory markers in 
breast cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.

Liu L(1), Mills PJ, Rissling M, Fiorentino L, Natarajan L, Dimsdale JE, Sadler
GR, Parker BA, Ancoli-Israel S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0733, USA.

Fatigue and sleep disturbances are two of the most common and distressing
symptoms reported by cancer patients. Fatigue and sleep are also correlated with 
each other. While fatigue has been reported to be associated with some
inflammatory markers, data about the relationship between cancer-related sleep
disturbances and inflammatory markers are limited. This study examined the
relationship between fatigue and sleep, measured both subjectively and
objectively, and inflammatory markers in a sample of breast cancer patients
before and during chemotherapy. Fifty-three women with newly diagnosed stage
I-III breast cancer scheduled to receive at least four 3-week cycles of
chemotherapy participated in this longitudinal study. Fatigue was assessed with
the Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory-Short Form (MFSI-SF), sleep
quality was assessed with the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) and objective
sleep was measured with actigraphy. Three inflammatory markers were examined:
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), Interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA) and C-reactive
protein (CRP). Data were collected before (baseline) and during cycle 1 and cycle
4 of chemotherapy. Compared to baseline, more fatigue was reported, levels of
IL-6 increased and IL-1RA decreased during chemotherapy. Reports of sleep quality
remained poor. Mixed model analyses examining changes from baseline to each
treatment time point revealed overall positive relationships between changes in
total MFSI-SF scores and IL-6, between changes in total PSQI scores and IL-6 and 
IL-1RA, and between total wake time at night and CRP (all p's<0.05). These
relationships suggest that cancer-related fatigue and sleep disturbances may
share common underlying biochemical mechanisms.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3372667
PMID: 22406004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Med Rep. 2012 May;5(5):1281-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.814. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Melatonin improves inflammatory cytokine profiles in lung inflammation associated
with sleep deprivation.

Kim JY(1), Lee YD, Kim BJ, Kim SP, Kim DH, Jo KJ, Lee SK, Lee KH, Baik HW.

Author information: 
(1)Soonchunhyang Medical Research Institute, Soonchunhyang University College of 
Medicine, Asan, Chungnam, Republic of Korea.

Sleep disturbance has become an endemic behavior in modern countries, and its
prevalence has also increased. Even a subtle sleep deficiency is related to
health problems. Particularly, patients with pulmonary disease often complain of 
insomnia. We recently showed that sleep deprivation (SD) exacerbates existing
acute lung inflammation, and that melatonin treatment attenuates it via
anti-apoptotic and anti-oxidant action. In order to reinforce our previous
report, the present study was designed to evaluate pro-inflammatory mediators in 
acute lung inflammation in SD mice. In addition, we investigated the infiltration
of inflammatory cells into the lungs. Twenty-five ICR mice were divided into 5
groups (n=5/group): control, SD, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), LPS + SD and LPS + SD 
+ melatonin. The SD mice were deprived of sleep for 96 h in a multiplatform water
bath. LPS (5 mg/kg) and melatonin (5 mg/kg) were administered on day 2. The mice 
were sacrificed on day 3, and serum and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid were
collected. The serum levels of inflammatory cytokines were increased in the LPS +
SD group. Interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor-α and interferon-γ levels were
also increased in BAL fluid in the LPS + SD group. Melatonin reduced inflammatory
mediators in the serum and BAL fluid. The accumulation of leukocytes in the LPS
and LPS + SD mice was elevated, however, melatonin inhibited the recruitment of
inflammatory cells (p<0.05). Lymphocytes in the BAL fluid of the LPS + SD group
were increased, and macrophage levels were decreased; however, the increment was 
attenuated by melatonin administration (p<0.05). In conclusion, this study
indicates that melatonin has a protective effect against lung inflammation
associated with SD.

PMID: 22377793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Sep;20(9):744-52. doi:
10.1097/JGP.0b013e31824361de.

Sleep disturbance and older adults' inflammatory responses to acute stress.

Heffner KL(1), Ng HM, Suhr JA, France CR, Marshall GD, Pigeon WR, Moynihan JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Rochester Center for Mind-Body Research, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
Kathi_Heffner@urmc.rochester.edu

OBJECTIVES: Poor sleep diminishes mental and physical health. The objective of
this study was to examine associations between sleep disturbance and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) responses to acute mental stress in older adults.
DESIGN: Observational study of community-dwelling, healthy older adults.
SETTING: Participants completed the study in a clinical research laboratory of a 
mid-sized university.
PARTICIPANTS: Generally healthy, community-dwelling men and women age 50 and
older.
MEASUREMENTS: IL-6 and negative affect at rest and following a series of
challenging cognitive tests; sleep quality; depressive symptoms; perceived
stress; loneliness.
RESULTS: Participants categorized as poor sleepers on the basis of Pittsburgh
Sleep Quality Index scores had significantly larger IL-6 responses to the
cognitive stressors than good sleepers. The association between poor sleep and
heightened IL-6 response to acute stress was not explained by other psychosocial 
factors previously linked to immune dysregulation, including depressive symptoms,
perceived stress, and loneliness.
CONCLUSIONS: Findings add to the growing evidence for poor sleep as an
independent risk factor for poor mental and physical health. Older adults may be 
particularly vulnerable to effects of sleep disturbance due to significant
age-related changes in both sleep and inflammatory regulation.

PMCID: PMC3588882
PMID: 22327621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2012 Feb;8(2):123-33. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.95.

Chronotherapy with modified-release prednisone in patients with rheumatoid
arthritis.

Alten R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Rheumatology, Clinical Immunology &
Osteology, Schlosspark-Klinik Teaching Hospital Charité University Medicine
Berlin, Heubnerweg 2, 14059 Berlin, Germany. rieke.alten@schlosspark-klinik.de

Glucocorticoids are indispensable for the treatment of systemic inflammatory
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), though their beneficial effects have 
to be balanced with potential complications arising from high doses, prolonged
use or dose splitting. A glucocorticoid formulation (modified-release prednisone)
has been developed to be taken in accordance with biological rhythms
(chronotherapy). Morning symptoms of RA are caused by elevated nocturnal levels
of proinflammatory cytokines, particularly IL-6. Endogenous cortisol levels may
be insufficient to counter the inflammatory effects of IL-6. The early morning
rise in cortisol can be supplemented with exogenous glucocorticoid replacement
therapy if this is given as the recently developed chronotherapy formulation.
There is no adverse impact of modified-release prednisone on the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis; indeed, there might be evidence of a
beneficial effect on HPA axis function. This review summarizes the development of
modified-release prednisone, pharmacokinetic characteristics and clinical
experience in patients with RA.

PMID: 22288450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Mar;76(3):419-22. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.01.001. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

Circulating cytokines in patients undergoing tonsillectomy with fibrin glue.

Stiller-Timor L(1), Goldbart AD, Segal N, Amash A, Huleihel M, Leiberman A, Tal
A, Holcberg G, Puterman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Soroka University Medical
Center, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Beer-Sheva, Israel. lirant1@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Fibrin glue is used as a haemostatic agent or as a sealant. The aim of
this study is to objectively evaluate the efficacy of the use of fibrin glue
Quixil - a human surgical sealer - in tonsillectomy, for the reduction of
post-operative inflammatory response.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective randomized single-blind study.
METHODS: The study was performed on 40 consecutive patients undergoing
adenotonsillectomy (T&A). Patients were randomly assigned to one of two
sub-groups: a study group and a control group. The tonsillar beds of patients in 
the study group were coated with fibrin glue (Quixil, OMRIX biopharmaceuticals)
at the end of the operation; the patients in the control group were treated for
hemostasis without the use of fibrin glue. Complete blood counts and circulating 
pro-inflammatory cytokines (assayed by specific immunoassay - ELISA) were
assessed in samples drawn pre- and 16 h post-tonsillectomy.
RESULTS: Forty patients (aged 5.8 ± 2.4 years) were consecutively enrolled; 45%
(18) of the patients were treated with fibrin glue, 55% (22) were not. Compared
to controls, Quixil-treated patients demonstrated a reduction in
post-tonsillectomy circulating leukocytes (29.2% vs. 45.4%, p<0.05), neutrophiles
(28.3% vs. 42.1%, p<0.05), IL-6 (+1% vs. +42%, p<0.05), and TNF-alpha (+8% vs.
+26%, p<0.05.
CONCLUSIONS: Intra-operative fibrin glue therapy is associated with decreased
immediate inflammatory response following T&A. Further studies are warranted to
assess long-term outcome.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 1B.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22277266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Jul;26(5):699-705. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.12.007. Epub
2012 Jan 10.

Serum sTNF-R1, IL-6, and the development of fatigue in patients with
gastrointestinal cancer undergoing chemoradiation therapy.

Wang XS(1), Williams LA, Krishnan S, Liao Z, Liu P, Mao L, Shi Q, Mobley GM,
Woodruff JF, Cleeland CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. xswang@mdanderson.org

Although evidence of inflammation and fatigue has been noted in cancer survivors,
whether inflammation is linked to the expression of fatigue and other symptoms
arising from concurrent chemoradiation therapy (CXRT) has not been well studied. 
Patients undergoing CXRT for locally advanced colorectal or esophageal cancer
(n=103) reported multiple symptoms weekly via the M. D. Anderson Symptom
Inventory (MDASI) from start of therapy. Serum samples were collected weekly to
examine changes in inflammatory markers (interleukin (IL)-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and
soluble receptor 1 for tumor necrosis factor (sTNF-R1)) via enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. Relationships between symptom severity and
inflammatory-marker concentration levels were estimated using mixed-effect
regression analysis, controlled for week of therapy, age, sex, body mass index,
pre-CXRT tumor stage, pre-CXRT chemotherapy, pre-CXRT statin use, and type of
cancer. Fatigue was the most severe symptom over time, its development profile
shared with pain, distress, drowsiness, poor appetite, and disturbed sleep.
sTNF-R1 and IL-6 shared a similar pattern of symptom development, with
significant increase during CXRT and decrease after completion of CXRT. Serum
concentrations of sTNF-R1 were positively associated over time with the severity 
of fatigue (p=0.00097), while sTNF-R1 and IL-6 were positively related to the
severity of a component score of the six most severe symptoms (both p<0.0001).
This longitudinal study suggests a role for over-expressed sTNF-R1 and IL-6 in
the development of fatigue and other severe sickness symptoms during CXRT in
patients with colorectal or esophageal cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3355215
PMID: 22251605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 10;109(2):582-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1106750109.
Epub 2011 Dec 19.

The nuclear receptor REV-ERBα mediates circadian regulation of innate immunity
through selective regulation of inflammatory cytokines.

Gibbs JE(1), Blaikley J, Beesley S, Matthews L, Simpson KD, Boyce SH, Farrow SN, 
Else KJ, Singh D, Ray DW, Loudon AS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre,
University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United Kingdom.

Diurnal variation in inflammatory and immune function is evident in the
physiology and pathology of humans and animals, but molecular mechanisms and
mediating cell types that provide this gating remain unknown. By screening
cytokine responses in mice to endotoxin challenge at different times of day, we
reveal that the magnitude of response exhibited pronounced temporal dependence,
yet only within a subset of proinflammatory cytokines. Disruption of the
circadian clockwork in macrophages (primary effector cells of the innate immune
system) by conditional targeting of a key clock gene (bmal1) removed all temporal
gating of endotoxin-induced cytokine response in cultured cells and in vivo. Loss
of circadian gating was coincident with suppressed rev-erbα expression,
implicating this nuclear receptor as a potential link between the clock and
inflammatory pathways. This finding was confirmed in vivo and in vitro through
genetic and pharmacological modulation of REV-ERBα activity. Circadian gating of 
endotoxin response was lost in rev-erbα(-/-) mice and in cultured macrophages
from these animals, despite maintenance of circadian rhythmicity within these
cells. Using human macrophages, which show circadian clock gene oscillations and 
rhythmic endotoxin responses, we demonstrate that administration of a synthetic
REV-ERB ligand, or genetic knockdown of rev-erbα expression, is effective at
modulating the production and release of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6. This 
work demonstrates that the macrophage clockwork provides temporal gating of
systemic responses to endotoxin, and identifies REV-ERBα as the key link between 
the clock and immune function. REV-ERBα may therefore represent a unique
therapeutic target in human inflammatory disease.

PMCID: PMC3258648
PMID: 22184247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Jul;26(5):739-46. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.11.007. Epub
2011 Dec 1.

Inflammation and reactivation of latent herpesviruses in older adults.

Bennett JM(1), Glaser R, Malarkey WB, Beversdorf DQ, Peng J, Kiecolt-Glaser JK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Jeanette.Bennett@osumc.edu

Inflammation increases with age and is associated with many chronic diseases that
are prevalent among older adults. Persistent pathogens such as latent
herpesviruses and chronic bacterial infections can act as a source of
inflammation. Herpesviruses, including Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and
cytomegalovirus (CMV), establish latent infections following primary infection
and reactivate when the cellular immune system is compromised. EBV and CMV
replication can induce proinflammatory cytokine production and thus could
influence systemic inflammation. The present study addressed relationships among 
EBV and CMV antibody titers, and levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) in a sample of 222 community dwelling older adults
(mean(age)=64.1±14.1 years). Participants were divided into two groups based on
whether they were EBV seropositive and CMV seronegative (EBV+CMV-), or EBV and
CMV seropositive (EBV+CMV+). Among individuals who were EBV+CMV-, EBV antibody
titers were not associated with either CRP or IL-6 levels. However, among those
who were EBV+CMV+, higher EBV antibody titers were related to elevated levels of 
CRP and IL-6 in those individuals with higher CMV antibody titers; there was no
relationship between EBV antibody titers and CRP or IL-6 levels in those
participants with lower CMV antibody titers. These data suggest that the
combination of latent EBV and CMV reactivation (indexed by antibody titers) may
boost CRP and IL-6 production. Thus, reactivation of multiple herpesviruses may
drive inflammation and could contribute to poorer health among older adults.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3370109
PMID: 22155500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Jan;12(1):217-25. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2011.11.014.
Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Fluticasone propionate and Salmeterol combination induces SOCS-3 expression in
airway epithelial cells.

Nasreen N(1), Khodayari N, Sukka-Ganesh B, Peruvemba S, Mohammed KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States.

Fluticasone propionate (FP) and Salmeterol (SAL) are commonly used in combination
therapy for patients with Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Clinical 
studies show that FP/SAL used in combination therapy was found to inhibit airway 
inflammation in COPD patients. However, the mechanisms associated with FP/SAL
induced anti-inflammatory effects were not clear. We have evaluated the effect of
FP/SAL and tobacco smoke (TS) on SOCS-3 and interleukine-6 expression in
bronchial airway epithelial cells (BAEpCs). Human BAEpCs were exposed to TS and
subsequently treated with FP or SAL alone or in combinations in the presence and 
absence of mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) inhibitors for either
Erk1/Erk2, or p38 or PI3 kinase. In BAEpCs, TS induced IL-6 expression via
ERK1/ERK2 MAPK pathway and FP/SAL inhibited TS mediated IL-6 expression. TS down 
regulated the SOCS-3 expression via activation of Erk1/Erk2, and p38 MAPK
signaling. When TS exposed BAEpCs were treated with FP/SAL SOCS-3 expression was 
restored. FP/SAL combinations induced significantly higher expression of SOCS-3
in BAEpCs when compared to individual drug. Pretreatment with Ly294002 a PI3 MAPK
inhibitor significantly attenuated FP/SAL induced SOCS-3 expression in BAEpCs.
Furthermore, FP/SAL blunted TS induced phosphorylation of Erk1/Erk2 and p38 MAPK 
in BAEpCs. Our study suggests that TS inhibits SOCS-3, combination of FP/SAL has 
a profound synergistic effect on SOCS-3 induction in BAEpCs and it is dependent
on PI3 kinase signaling pathway. SOCS-3 may represent a potential biomarker for
understanding the efficacy and a novel anti-inflammatory mechanism of FP/SAL
combination therapy in the treatment of COPD.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22155101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Metabolism. 2012 May;61(5):611-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.10.005. Epub 2011
Dec 5.

Metabolic consequences of stress during childhood and adolescence.

Pervanidou P(1), Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pediatrics, Athens University Medical School, Aghia Sophia
Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece. ppervanid@med.uoa.gr

Comment in
    Metabolism. 2012 May;61(5):e1; author reply e3-4.

Stress, that is, the state of threatened or perceived as threatened homeostasis, 
is associated with activation of the stress system, mainly comprised by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the arousal/sympathetic nervous systems. 
The stress system normally functions in a circadian manner and interacts with
other systems to regulate a variety of behavioral, endocrine, metabolic, immune, 
and cardiovascular functions. However, the experience of acute intense physical
or emotional stress, as well as of chronic stress, may lead to the development of
or may exacerbate several psychologic and somatic conditions, including anxiety
disorders, depression, obesity, and the metabolic syndrome. In chronically
stressed individuals, both behavioral and neuroendocrine mechanisms promote
obesity and metabolic abnormalities: unhealthy lifestyles in conjunction with
dysregulation of the stress system and increased secretion of cortisol,
catecholamines, and interleukin-6, with concurrently elevated insulin
concentrations, lead to development of central obesity, insulin resistance, and
the metabolic syndrome. Fetal life, childhood, and adolescence are particularly
vulnerable periods of life to the effects of intense acute or chronic stress.
Similarly, these life stages are crucial for the later development of behavioral,
metabolic, and immune abnormalities. Developing brain structures and functions
related to stress regulation, such as the amygdala, the hippocampus, and the
mesocorticolimbic system, are more vulnerable to the effects of stress compared
with mature structures in adults. Moreover, chronic alterations in cortisol
secretion in children may affect the timing of puberty, final stature, and body
composition, as well as cause early-onset obesity, metabolic syndrome, and type 2
diabetes mellitus. The understanding of stress mechanisms leading to metabolic
abnormalities in early life may lead to more effective prevention and
intervention strategies of obesity-related health problems.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22146091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Int Urol Nephrol. 2012 Apr;44(2):607-17. doi: 10.1007/s11255-011-0095-7. Epub
2011 Dec 6.

Lack of association between objectively assessed sleep disorders and inflammatory
markers among kidney transplant recipients.

Fornadi K(1), Lindner A, Czira ME, Szentkiralyi A, Lazar AS, Zoller R, Turanyi
CZ, Veber O, Novak M, Mucsi I, Molnar MZ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Behavioural Sciences, Semmelweis University, Nagyvarad ter 4, XX.
Floor, 1089 Budapest, Hungary.

PURPOSE: In patients on dialysis, the results of studies examining the
association between sleep disorders and inflammation are controversial. We
assessed the association between inflammatory markers and different sleep
disorders in a large sample of kidney transplant recipients.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study of 100 randomly selected kidney transplant
patients who underwent one-night polysomnography ("sleep disorders evaluation in 
patients after kidney transplantation study") to diagnose obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA) and periodic limb movements in sleep (PLMS). Athens Insomnia Scale (AIS)
was utilized to assess the prevalence of insomnia. Sociodemographic information
and data about medication, comorbidity and laboratory parameters were collected. 
Levels of inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein, serum albumin, white 
blood cell count, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), were 
measured.
RESULTS: The mean age was 51 ± 13 years, 43% were women, and the prevalence of
diabetes was 19%. We found no significant difference in the levels of
inflammatory markers between patients with versus without OSA and PLMS.
Apnea-hypopnea index showed a significant association with white blood cell count
(ρ = 0.23), and weak (ρ < |0.15|), non-significant correlation with the other
inflammatory markers. PLM index showed weak (ρ < |0.15|), non-significant
correlation with all markers of inflammation. The serum IL-6 level was
significantly higher in patients with insomnia (AIS ≥ 10) than in non-insomniacs 
[median (IQR): 3.2(2.6-5.1) vs. 1.7(1.2-2.9) ng/l; P = 0.009]. The levels of
other inflammatory markers were similar between insomniacs and non-insomniacs.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find any association between the presence of objectively 
assessed sleep disorders and inflammatory markers in kidney transplant patients.

PMID: 22143277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 6;417(1):256-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.11.096. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Curcumin regulates airway epithelial cell cytokine responses to the pollutant
cadmium.

Rennolds J(1), Malireddy S, Hassan F, Tridandapani S, Parinandi N, Boyaka PN,
Cormet-Boyaka E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States.

Cadmium is a toxic metal present in the environment and its inhalation can lead
to pulmonary disease such as lung cancer and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. These lung diseases are characterized by chronic inflammation. Here we
show that exposure of human airway epithelial cells to cadmium promotes a
polarized apical secretion of IL-6 and IL-8, two pivotal pro-inflammatory
cytokines known to play an important role in pulmonary inflammation. We also
determined that two distinct pathways controlled secretion of these
proinflammatory cytokines by human airway epithelial cells as cadmium-induced
IL-6 secretion occurs via an NF-κB dependent pathway, whereas IL-8 secretion
involves the Erk1/2 signaling pathway. Interestingly, the natural antioxidant
curcumin could prevent both cadmium-induced IL-6 and IL-8 secretion by human
airway epithelial cells. In conclusion, curcumin could be used to prevent airway 
inflammation due to cadmium inhalation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3259219
PMID: 22142850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Rheumatol. 2012 Jan;39(1):60-2. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110617. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

Sleep disturbances and interleukin 6 receptor inhibition in rheumatoid arthritis.

Fragiadaki K(1), Tektonidou MG, Konsta M, Chrousos GP, Sfikakis PP.

Author information: 
(1)Athens University Medical School, 17 Ag Thoma Str, 11527, Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Interleukin 6 (IL-6)-mediated interactions have been associated with
sleep disturbances in healthy subjects. In this pilot study we examined whether
administration of the IL-6 receptor antagonist tocilizumab in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) affects sleep disturbances.
METHODS: Fifteen patients (13 women) with sleep disturbances at baseline received
6 monthly infusions of tocilizumab 8 mg/kg for moderately or severely active RA. 
Sleep quality was assessed by Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), daytime
sleepiness by Epworth Sleepiness Scale, disease activity by the 28-joint Disease 
Activity Score-erythrocyte sedimentation rate, functional disability by Health
Assessment Questionnaire Disability Index (HAQ-DI), and fatigue by the Functional
Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT-Fatigue Scale; FFS) at baseline and 
first, second, third, and sixth month of treatment. Medications used before
enrollment remained unchanged during followup.
RESULTS: Sleep quality improved and daytime sleepiness decreased significantly at
first-month assessment (p < 0.00001 and p < 0.004, respectively, by repeated
measurement analysis) compared to baseline, and these changes became more evident
through 6 months. Disease activity decreased, fatigue decreased, and functional
status improved significantly. Changes in PSQI score over time were not
associated with the corresponding changes in DAS28-ESR (r = 0.37, p = 0.17), but 
correlated significantly with HAQ-DI changes (r = 0.60, p = 0.02) and marginally 
with changes in FFS scores (r = -0.46, p = 0.08).
CONCLUSION: Improvement of sleep quality after tocilizumab treatment in patients 
with RA does not appear to directly result from decreased disease activity,
further suggesting that aberrant IL-6 regulation is associated with sleep
disturbances.

PMID: 22133618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Toxicol Sci. 2012 Feb;125(2):418-29. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr310. Epub 2011 Nov
17.

An NF-κB-independent and Erk1/2-dependent mechanism controls CXCL8/IL-8 responses
of airway epithelial cells to cadmium.

Cormet-Boyaka E(1), Jolivette K, Bonnegarde-Bernard A, Rennolds J, Hassan F,
Mehta P, Tridandapani S, Webster-Marketon J, Boyaka PN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Internal Medicine, Dorothy M. Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, Columbus, 
OH 43210, USA. Estelle.boyaka@osumc.edu

Airway epithelial cells in the lung are the first line of defense against
pathogens and environmental pollutants. Inhalation of the environmental pollutant
cadmium has been linked to the development of lung cancer and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, which are diseases characterized by chronic inflammation. To
address the role of airway epithelial cells in cadmium-induced lung inflammation,
we investigated how cadmium regulates secretion of interleukin 8 (IL-8) by airway
epithelial cells. We show that exposure of human airway epithelial cells to
subtoxic doses of cadmium in vitro promotes a characteristic inflammatory
cytokine response consisting of IL-8, but not IL-1β or tumor necrosis
factor-alpha. We also found that intranasal delivery of cadmium increases lung
levels of the murine IL-8 homologs macrophage inflammatory protein-2 and
keracinocyte-derived chemokine and results in an influx of Gr1+ cells into the
lung. We determined that inhibition of the nuclear factor-κB (NF-κB) pathway had 
no effect on cadmium-induced IL-8 secretion by human airway epithelial cells,
suggesting that IL-8 production was mediated through an NF-κB-independent
pathway. Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) are often involved in
proinflammatory signaling. Cadmium could activate the main MAPKs (i.e., p38, JNK,
and Erk1/2) in human airway epithelial cells. However, only pharmacological
inhibition of Erk1/2 pathway or knockdown of the expression of Erk1 and Erk2
using small interfering RNAs suppressed secretion of IL-8 induced by cadmium. Our
findings identify cadmium as a potent activator of the proinflammatory cytokine
IL-8 in lung epithelial cells and reveal for the first time the role of an
NF-κB-independent but Erk1/2-dependent pathway in cadmium-induced lung
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3262857
PMID: 22094458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2011 Sep-Oct;29(5 Suppl 68):S42-5. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Prednisone chronotherapy.

Spies CM(1), Cutolo M, Straub RH, Burmester GR, Buttgereit F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Campus Mitte, Berlin, Germany.
cornelia.spies@charite.de

Glucocorticoids (GCs) are widely used in clinical medicine because of their
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects. However, these agents have a
considerable potential for adverse effects, especially if used in high doses. The
currently most advanced approach to improve the risk-benefit ratio of GCs is
low-dose prednisone chronotherapy with modified release (MR) prednisone timing
drug release to chronobiological rhythms. In RA, the circadian rhythms of pain,
stiffness and functional disability show maximum symptoms in the early morning
hours, which is preceded by elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines, in
particular interleukin 6. It was hypothesised that preventing the nocturnal rise 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines by GC therapy is more effective than treating
established symptoms in the morning. As waking in the night for tablet intake is 
impracticable, modified release (MR) prednisone was developed, which releases
prednisone approximately four hours after ingestion (i.e. at approximately 2 am
if taken at 10 pm bedtime). Data from two large-scale trials in rheumatoid
arthritis (RA) (CAPRA-1 and 2) document that MR prednisone has greater efficacy
for long-term, low-dose glucocorticoid treatment in patients with RA, with a
significant reduction in morning joint stiffness, in addition to all known
therapeutic effects with conventional prednisone and a similar safety profile
without additional suppression of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. For 
patients with RA on low to medium doses of prednisone, especially those who
continue to experience a long duration of morning stiffness, MR prednisone
appears a valuable additional treatment option.

PMID: 22018182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Brain Behav Immun. 2012 Jul;26(5):747-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.10.009. Epub
2011 Oct 29.

Vulnerability, distress, and immune response to vaccination in older adults.

Segerstrom SC(1), Hardy JK, Evans DR, Greenberg RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0044,
USA. segerstrom@uky.edu

Psychological distress and biobehavioral vulnerability (e.g., arising from being 
older or sedentary) have independently predicted immune responses to influenza
vaccination in older adults. Recent research examining basal inflammatory markers
suggests that, rather than having additive effects, distress and vulnerability
interact with each other. The present study tested the interactions between
distress and age, sex, education, BMI, sleep quality, and physical activity over 
up to 8 years in older adults (N=134; M age=74 years) who received annual
influenza vaccinations. Measured vaccination responses were changes from baseline
in antibody to the three vaccine components, interleukin (IL)-6, and
β2-microglobulin. As predicted, the most robust effects were interactions between
distress and vulnerability. BMI interacted with stable individual differences in 
distress to predict antibody response (t(132)=3.09, p<0.003), such that only the 
combination of low BMI and low distress was associated with a more robust
antibody response. Likewise, changes in physical activity over time interacted
with changes in distress (t(156)=2.96, p<0.004), such that only the combination
of increased physical activity and decreased distress was associated with a more 
robust antibody response. Finally, there was a smaller tendency for age to
interact with stable individual differences in distress (t(130)=2.46, p<0.015),
such that distress was more strongly associated with post-vaccination IL-6 at
older ages. The synergistic effects of distress and other forms of vulnerability 
are an important direction for future research and a target for interventions to 
improve immunological health in older adults.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3303963
PMID: 22062498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Sleep. 2011 Nov 1;34(11):1583-93. doi: 10.5665/sleep.1402.

Self-reported sleep duration and time in bed as predictors of physical function
decline: results from the InCHIANTI study.

Stenholm S(1), Kronholm E, Bandinelli S, Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Health and Welfare, Department of Health, Functional
Capacity and Welfare, Functional Capacity Unit, Turku, Finland.
sari.stenholm@thl.fi

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To characterize elderly persons into sleep/rest groups based on
their self-reported habitual total sleeping time (TST) and habitual time in bed
(TIB) and to examine the prospective association between sleep/rest behavior on
physical function decline.
DESIGN: Population-based InCHIANTI study with 6 years follow-up (Tuscany, Italy).
SETTING: Community.
PARTICIPANTS: Men and women aged ≥ 65 years (n = 751).
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: At baseline, participants were categorized into 5
sleep/rest behavior groups according to their self-reported TST and TIB, computed
from bedtime and wake-up time. Physical function was assessed at baseline and at 
3- and 6-year follow-ups as walking speed, the Short Physical Performance Battery
(SPPB), and self-reported mobility disability (ability to walk 400 m or climb one
flight of stairs). Both long (≥ 9 h) TST and long TIB predicted accelerated
decline in objectively measured physical performance and greater incidence in
subjectively assessed mobility disability, but short (≤ 6 h) TST did not. After
combining TST and TIB, long sleepers (TST and TIB ≥ 9 h) experienced the greatest
decline in physical performance and had the highest risk for incident mobility
disability in comparison to mid-range sleepers with 7-8 h TST and TIB. Subjective
short sleepers reporting short (≤ 6 h) TST but long (≥ 9 h) TIB showed a greater 
decline in SPPB score and had a higher risk of incident mobility disability than 
true short sleepers with short (≤ 6 h) TST and TIB ≤ 8 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: Extended time in bed as well as long total sleeping time is
associated with greater physical function decline than mid-range or short sleep. 
TIB offers important additive information to the self-reported sleep duration
when evaluating the consequences of sleep duration on health and functional
status.

PMCID: PMC3198213
PMID: 22043129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Sleep Med. 2011 Dec;12(10):997-1002. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.05.009. Epub 2011 
Oct 28.

Sleep duration and emerging cardiometabolic risk markers in adolescents. The
AFINOS study.

Martinez-Gomez D(1), Eisenmann JC, Gomez-Martinez S, Hill EE, Zapatera B, Veiga
OL, Marcos A; AFINOS Study Group.

Collaborators: Calle ME, Villagra A, Marcos A, Regidor E, Martínez-Hernández D,
Esteban-Gonzalo L, Villagra A, Veiga OL, del-Campo J, Moya JM, Martínez-Gómez D, 
Zapatera B, Marcos A, Gómez-Martínez S, Nova E, Wärnberg J, Romeo J, Diaz LE,
Pozo T, Puertollano MA, Martínez-Gómez D, Zapatera B, Veses A.

Author information: 
(1)Immunonutrition Research Group, Department of Metabolism and Nutrition,
Institute of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN), Spanish National
Research Council (CSIC), Madrid, Spain. d.martinez@uam.es

OBJECTIVE: To examine the associations between sleep duration and emerging
inflammatory and endothelial function risk factors in adolescents.
METHODS: This study included a total of 183 (88 girls) adolescents, aged 13-17
years, without diagnosed sleep-related disorders. White blood cell counts,
C-reactive protein (CRP), complement factors 3 and 4, interleukin-6, adiponectin,
leptin, inter-cellular adhesion molecule 1, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1,
E-selectin, l-selectin, and plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 were measured.
Sleep duration and sleep-related disorders were obtained by self-report and
moderate-to-vigorous physical activity (MVPA) was objectively measured by
accelerometer. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated from measured height and
weight.
RESULTS: A significant inverse association between sleep duration and CRP
(β=-0.17, P=0.024) existed only after controlling for sex, age, and pubertal
status. The results did not change when MVPA was included into the model.
However, the association of sleep duration with CRP was slightly attenuated when 
BMI was included in the model, though it remained significant (β=-0.15, P=0.044).
CONCLUSION: Short sleep duration during adolescence might play an important and
independent role in cardiovascular and metabolic diseases through CRP.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22036601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012 May;37(5):671-84. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.07.021. Epub 2011 Oct 14.

Evidence for an association between an enhanced reactivity of interleukin-6
levels and reduced glucocorticoid sensitivity in patients with fibromyalgia.

Geiss A(1), Rohleder N, Anton F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, University of Trier, D-54290 Trier, Germany;
University of Cologne, D-50931 Köln, Germany. geissa@uni-koeln.de

Pain and fatigue have been identified as core symptoms of fibromyalgia syndrome
(FMS). Since both symptoms are also characteristic of hypocortisolemic disorders,
reduced cortisol levels have been thought to promote an exacerbation of these FMS
core symptoms by an enhanced reactivity of interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels. The aim
of the current study was to investigate the pathophysiologic relevance of reduced
cortisol levels for manifestation of FMS core symptoms. Twelve female FMS
patients with 15 female controls were compared regarding the function of
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and behavioral, endocrine and IL-6
responses after measuring the pressure pain thresholds (PPTs) at tender points.
Function of HPA axis was assessed by determining the cortisol awakening response,
daytime profile of cortisol secretion, low dose overnight dexamethasone
suppression test (DST) and glucocorticoid sensitivity (GC) of inflammatory
cytokine production. While endocrine and IL-6 responses were determined by
collecting blood and saliva samples behavioral responses were assessed by pain
and fatigue recordings of participants before and after PPT measurement using
visual analogue scale (VAS). Whereas FMS patients were found not to differ from
controls in cortisol awakening response, daytime profile of cortisol secretion
and cortisol suppression after overnight DST, they did exhibit a reduced GC
sensitivity of inflammatory cytokine production. PPT measurement did induce three
times higher cortisol and four times higher IL-6 levels in FMS patients, but no
change in their ACTH levels. The enhanced IL-6 reactivity after PPT measurement
was accompanied by an increase in the severity of FMS patients' pain and fatigue 
ratings. The findings of the present study provide evidence for the
pathophysiologic relevance of a disturbed glucocorticoid receptor (GR) function, 
rather than reduced cortisol levels for the maintenance of FMS core symptoms.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22000300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Surgery. 2012 Jan;151(1):107-12. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2011.06.035. Epub 2011 Oct
6.

Alveolar macrophage activation in obese patients with obstructive sleep apnea.

Sharma S(1), Malur A, Marshall I, Huizar I, Barna BP, Pories W, Dohm L, Kavuru
MS, Thomassen MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Lung Cell Biology and Translational Research, Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, The Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

BACKGROUND: Classically, activated macrophages in adipose tissue, liver, and
muscle have been implicated in many conditions associated with obesity, including
insulin resistance and the metabolic syndrome. Despite numerous pulmonary
comorbidities and the sentinel role alveolar macrophages play in innate immunity 
and lung homeostasis, their activation status has not been examined in these
patients. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (PPAR-γ) has been
shown to be a negative regulator of inflammation in addition to regulating lipid 
and glucose metabolism. PPAR-γ is expressed constitutively in healthy alveolar
macrophages and decreased on activation. We hypothesized that PPAR-γ would be
downregulated in alveolar macrophages from obese patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea (OSA) in the absence of overt lung disease.
METHODS: Alveolar macrophages were obtained by bronchoalveolar lavage from obese 
individuals with and without OSA and healthy controls.
RESULTS: Data indicated that PPAR-γ functional activity was decreased by 48% in
obese with OSA and 26% without OSA (P < .05). In obese patients with OSA, PPAR-γ 
mRNA was decreased 2-fold compared with controls (P < .05), whereas obese
patients without OSA, it was not different. Regardless of OSA, alveolar
macrophages of obese patients demonstrated increased interleukin-6 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: These findings are consistent with the presence of classic macrophage
activation and an inflammatory lung environment. Data from this study suggest
that alveolar macrophage dysfunction becomes aggravated in OSA and may increase
pulmonary disease susceptibility.

Published by Mosby, Inc.

PMID: 21982524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nord J Psychiatry. 2012 Jun;66(3):183-8. doi: 10.3109/08039488.2011.611894. Epub 
2011 Sep 22.

Role of cytokines in atypical depression.

Yoon HK(1), Kim YK, Lee HJ, Kwon DY, Kim L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, South 
Korea.

BACKGROUND: Atypical depression (AD) is considered a biologically and
psychologically distinct subtype of depression. AD, contrary to melancholic
depression (MD), may have different alteration in cytokine activity.
AIMS: We aimed to investigate the differences of cytokine activity between AD
patients and MD patients. Among psychiatric patients visited to the Psychiatry
Department, Korea University Medical Center, 105 patients with major depression
who met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV) criteria based on clinical
interviews using a Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV were recruited. Among
105 patients, 35 patients had atypical feature. We measured in vitro cytokines
(interleukins) IL-2, IL-4, IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α).
RESULTS: Decreased IL-4 and increased IL-2 was observed in AD patients. IL-6 and 
TNF-α level of AD patients showed no difference from the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to MD, AD has reversed vegetative symptoms, i.e.
hypersomnia and hyperphagia. It is assumed that the phenotype difference between 
AD and MD might be related to Th1 cytokines (IL-2) and Th2 cytokines (IL-4) and
not related to monocytic cytokines (IL-6, and TNF-α).

PMID: 21936732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Sep;20(9):764-72. doi:
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3182330fd3.

Mitigating cellular inflammation in older adults: a randomized controlled trial
of Tai Chi Chih.

Irwin MR(1), Olmstead R.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. mirwin1@ucla.edu

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effects of a behavioral intervention, Tai Chi Chih
(TCC) on circulating markers of inflammation in older adults.
DESIGN: A prospective, randomized, controlled trial with allocation to two arms, 
TCC and health education (HE), 16 weeks of intervention administration, and 9
weeks follow-up.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 83 healthy older adults, aged 59 to 86 years.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary endpoint was circulating levels of interleukin 6
(IL-6). Secondary outcomes were circulating levels of C-reactive protein, soluble
IL-1 receptor antagonist, soluble IL-6 receptor, soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule, and IL-18. Severity of depressive symptoms, sleep quality, and physical
activity was also assessed over the treatment trial.
RESULTS: Among those older adults with high levels of IL-6 at entry, a trend for 
a treatment group by time interaction was found (F[1,70] = 3.48, p = 0.07), in
which TCC produced a drop of IL-6 levels comparable to those found in TCC and HE 
subgroups who had low levels of IL-6 at entry (t72's = 0.80, 1.63, p's >0.10),
whereas IL-6 in HE remained higher than the TCC and HE subgroups with low entry
IL-6 (t72 = 2.47, p = 0.02; t72 = 1.71, p = 0.09). Decreases in depressive
symptoms in the two treatment groups correlated with decreases of IL-6 (r = 0.28,
p <0.05). None of the other cellular markers of inflammation changed in TCC
versus HE.
CONCLUSION: TCC can be considered a useful behavioral intervention to reduce
circulating levels of IL-6 in older adults who show elevated levels of this
inflammatory marker and are at risk for inflammation-related morbidity.

PMCID: PMC3247625
PMID: 21934474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Acta Neurol Scand. 2012 Jul;126(1):17-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2011.01589.x. 
Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Obstructive sleep apnea and biomarkers of inflammation in ischemic stroke.

Medeiros CA(1), de Bruin VM, Andrade GM, Coutinho WM, de Castro-Silva C, de Bruin
PF.

Author information: 
(1)Pós-Graduação em Ciěncias Médicas, Universidade Federal do Ceara, Fortaleza,
Brazil.

Comment in
    Acta Neurol Scand. 2012 Jun;125(6):e32-3; author reply e34-5.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Despite a confirmed association between obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA) and stroke, the pathogenesis of OSA in stroke has not been
hitherto clarified. The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship
between respiratory abnormalities and atherogenic pro-inflammatory markers,
interleukin-1beta (IL-1β), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-α) in acute ischemic stroke patients.
METHODS: Nocturnal polygraphy was performed in 50 consecutive patients with acute
ischemic stroke in the first week after the event. Levels of inflammatory markers
(IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α) were determined from morning blood samples and
comparatively analyzed between cases with and without severe OSA and with
age-matched controls.
RESULTS: All patients with acute ischemic stroke, 31 men, mean age (64.3 ± 7.7
years), had apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) > 5 and 35 (70%) had severe OSA
(AHI ≥ 30). Hypertension was more frequent in patients with severe OSA (85.7%)
when compared to controls (40.0%) (P = 0.002). Stroke outcome, assessed by the
Barthel index, tended to be more severe (P = 0.06) in cases with severe OSA.
Patients with mild/moderate OSA and with severe OSA showed higher levels of IL-6 
when compared to controls (P = 0.01 and P = 0.000, respectively). Among cases
with acute stroke and severe OSA, IL-6 levels were correlated with lower
oxyhemoglobin desaturation (r=-0.30; P = 0.001) and with the desaturation index
(r = 0.15; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: IL-6, an atherogenic marker, shows a commensurate increase in stroke
patients with OSA. It is correlated with oxyhemoglobin desaturation and with
desaturation index and may be a surrogate measure to evaluate continuous positive
airway pressure therapy.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21916851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Sleep Res. 2012 Apr;21(2):147-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2011.00946.x. Epub
2011 Sep 6.

Relationship between sleep-disordered breathing and markers of systemic
inflammation in women from the general population.

Svensson M(1), Venge P, Janson C, Lindberg E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery,
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. malin.l.svensson@akademiska.se

Sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) is a risk factor for cardiovascular disease
(CVD). The underlying pathogenesis is not clear. In patients with obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) elevated levels of inflammatory markers, such as
C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumour necrosis factor α
(TNFα) have been found. These markers have also been shown as independent markers
of CVD in other populations. The aim of the study was to investigate the
association between SDB and systemic inflammation in a population-based cohort of
women. From 6817 women who previously answered a questionnaire concerning snoring
habits, 230 habitually snoring women and 170 women regardless of snoring status
went through polysomnography, anthropometric measurements and blood sampling.
Analyses were made for CRP, TNFα, IL-6, myeloperoxidase (MPO) and lysozyme. The
levels of CRP, IL-6 and lysozyme were significantly higher in subjects with
apnoea-hypopnoea index (AHI) ≥15 compared with women with lower AHI. All
inflammatory markers except MPO correlated to AHI and oxygen desaturation
measures, and to waist circumference. In multiple linear regressions adjusting
for age, waist circumference and smoking, independent correlations between oxygen
desaturation indices (ODI) and inflammation were found for IL-6 (P = 0.03 for %
sleep time with saturation <90%) and TNFα (P = 0.03 for ODI 3%). No significant
correlations were found between AHI and inflammation. Also, for women from the
general population there is an independent correlation between SDB and
inflammation, even after adjusting for obesity. The results indicate that
intermittent hypoxia, and not the AHI, is related to systemic inflammation seen
in OSAS.

© 2011 European Sleep Research Society.

PMID: 21895822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Ann Epidemiol. 2011 Nov;21(11):799-806. doi: 10.1016/j.annepidem.2011.07.004.
Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Sleep duration, sleep quality, and biomarkers of inflammation in a Taiwanese
population.

Dowd JB(1), Goldman N, Weinstein M.

Author information: 
(1)CUNY School of Public Health, Hunter College, City University of New York,
USA. jdowd@hunter.cuny.edu

PURPOSE: Short and long sleep duration and sleep quality are associated with
health including all-cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and
obesity. Inflammation may play a role in mediating these associations.
METHODS: We examined associations between inflammation and self-reported sleep
characteristics in 1020 respondents of the 2000 and 2006 Social Environment and
Biomarkers of Aging Study, a nationally representative survey of Taiwanese adults
ages 53 and over. Regression models were used to estimate cross-sectional
relationships between inflammation (interleukin-6, C-reactive protein,
fibrinogen, e-selectin, soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1, albumin, and
white blood cell count) and a modified Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, index
subcomponents, and self-reported sleep duration. Change in inflammatory markers
between 2000 and 2006 was also used to predict long or short sleep duration in
2006.
RESULTS: Inflammation was not related to the overall index of sleep quality.
However, longer sleep (>8 hr) was associated with higher levels of inflammation. 
These associations remained after adjustment for waist circumference,
self-reported health decline, diabetes, arthritis/rheumatism, heart disease, and 
depressive symptoms. Increases in inflammation between 2000 and 2006 were
associated with long but not short sleep duration in 2006 for several markers.
CONCLUSIONS: Long sleep duration may be a marker of underlying inflammatory
illness in older populations. Future studies should explore whether inflammation 
explains observed relationships between long sleep and mortality.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3204862
PMID: 21889359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012 Apr;37(4):534-42. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.08.003. Epub 2011 Sep 1.

The psychosocial, endocrine and immune consequences of caring for a child with
autism or ADHD.

Lovell B(1), Moss M, Wetherell M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 8ST,
UK. brian.lovell@northumbria.ac.uk

Research that has assessed the psychophysiological consequences of caregiver
stress in young and middle aged caregivers, that is, in populations not
contending with age associated decline of the endocrine and immune systems, has
been scarce and yielded inconsistent findings. To extend work in this area, this 
study assessed the psychosocial, endocrine and immune consequences of caregiver
stress in a cross sectional sample of young and middle aged caregivers of
children with autism and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) compared
against parents of typically developing children. Caregivers (n=56) and parent
controls (n=22) completed measures of psychological distress (perceived stress,
anxiety/depression), social support and physical health complaints. To capture
important indices of the diurnal cortisol pattern, cortisol was measured at
waking, 30 min post waking, 1200 h and 2200 h on two consecutive weekdays. Venous
blood was taken to assess systemic concentrations of proinflammatory biomarkers, 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and C-reactive protein (CRP). Caregivers scored markedly
higher on all measures of psychological distress; scores on social support
subscales, however, were significantly lower in this group. Diurnal patterns of
cortisol secretion did not differentiate between the groups; however, caregivers 
displayed elevated systemic concentrations of the proinflammatory biomarker, CRP 
and reported more frequent episodes of physical ill health. The stress of
caregiving exacts a significant psychophysiological toll, that is, even in the
absence of HPA dysregulation, caregivers demonstrated elevated concentrations of 
proinflammatory biomarkers and, therefore, might be at greater risk for diseases 
fostered by disinhibition of the inflammatory response.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21889267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2011 Aug;1231:23-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.06040.x.

Sleep quality, social well-being, gender, and inflammation: an integrative
analysis in a national sample.

Friedman EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute on Aging and Department of Population Health Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, USA. friedman1@wisc.edu

Social isolation and poor sleep quality are independent predictors of poor health
outcomes and increased biological risk for disease. We previously found in a
small sample of older women that the presence of social ties compensated for poor
sleep in associations with the inflammatory protein interleukin 6 (IL-6). The
current study extended those findings to a national sample of middle-aged and
older men and women. Using both subjective and objective sleep assessments, we
found that in men, but not in women, social engagement moderated the association 
of subjective sleep complaints with both IL-6 and the soluble adhesion molecule
E-selectin. Social engagement also moderated the link between sleep
efficiency-assessed by actigraphy-and IL-6 levels in men, but not in women. These
results extend our previous work and bolster the suggestion that positive
psychological functioning may compensate for other risk factors in predicting
advantageous profiles of biological risk in aging adults.

© 2011 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMCID: PMC3232033
PMID: 21884159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Braz J Med Biol Res. 2011 Oct;44(10):992-9. Epub 2011 Sep 2.

A link between sleep loss, glucose metabolism and adipokines.

Padilha HG(1), Crispim CA, Zimberg IZ, De-Souza DA, Waterhouse J, Tufik S,
de-Mello MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Psicobiologia, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo,
SP, Brasil.

The present review evaluates the role of sleep and its alteration in triggering
problems of glucose metabolism and the possible involvement of adipokines in this
process. A reduction in the amount of time spent sleeping has become an endemic
condition in modern society, and a search of the current literature has found
important associations between sleep loss and alterations of nutritional and
metabolic contexts. Studies suggest that sleep loss is associated with problems
in glucose metabolism and a higher risk for the development of insulin resistance
and type 2 diabetes mellitus. The mechanism involved may be associated with the
decreased efficacy of regulation of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis by
negative feedback mechanisms in sleep-deprivation conditions. In addition,
changes in the circadian pattern of growth hormone (GH) secretion might also
contribute to the alterations in glucose regulation observed during sleep loss.
On the other hand, sleep deprivation stress affects adipokines - increasing tumor
necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) and decreasing leptin and
adiponectin -, thus establishing a possible association between sleep-debt,
adipokines and glucose metabolism. Thus, a modified release of adipokines
resulting from sleep deprivation could lead to a chronic sub-inflammatory state
that could play a central role in the development of insulin resistance and type 
2 diabetes mellitus. Further studies are necessary to investigate the role of
sleep loss in adipokine release and its relationship with glucose metabolism.

PMID: 21881808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2011 Sep;38(5):E365-72. doi: 10.1188/11.ONF.E365-E372.

Disturbed sleep in pediatric patients with leukemia: the potential role of
interleukin-6 (-174GC) and tumor necrosis factor (-308GA) polymorphism.

Vallance K(1), Yang J, Li J, Crabtree VM, Hinds PS, Mandrell BN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth,
TX, USA.

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To explore an association between sleep quality in children
and adolescents undergoing therapy for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and
polymorphisms in two proinflammatory cytokines, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF).
DESIGN: Retrospective exploratory analysis using data from a multi-institutional 
prospective study comparing objective sleep measures by actigraphy over 10 days
with retrospective genotyping of IL-6 (-174GC) and TNF (-308GA).
SETTING: Pediatric oncology centers in the southeastern and southwestern United
States and in Canada.
SAMPLE: 88 children or adolescents with ALL.
METHODS: Secondary analysis of 88 patients (ages 5-18) with sleep quality
measured by actigraphy over 10 days in their home environment and retrospective
DNA genotyping.
MAIN RESEARCH VARIABLES: Sleep variables and genotype.
FINDINGS: IL-6 promoter (-174G>C) C allele was associated with fewer total daily 
sleep minutes (p = 0.028) and fewer daily nap minutes (p < 0.01). Patients with
the TNF genotype AA had 28.2 more minutes of wake after sleep onset (p = 0.015), 
3.4 more nocturnal wake episodes (p = 0.026), and a 5% lower sleep efficiency
rate (p = 0.03) than their GA genotype counterparts.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with the TNF (-308G>A) or IL-6 (-174G>C) polymorphisms
demonstrated disturbed sleep. This study is the first to find a relationship
between these two cytokines and disturbed sleep in children and adolescents with 
cancer.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Disturbed sleep among pediatric patients with cancer is
multifactoral and includes interactions among environment, medications, and
genotype. Additional research should explore serum proinflammatory cytokine
levels and the influence of mood and worry on sleep.

PMID: 21875833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Aug;31(8):1357-9.

[Role of inflammation factors in impaired glucose tolerance and sleep
apnea/hypopnea syndrome in pregnant women].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi ZM(1), Li TP, Xian LW, Li ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Center, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
zhiminshi@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possible role of inflammation factors in the
pathogenesis of impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) with concurrent obstructive
sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS) in pregnant women.
METHODS: Twenty-five pregnant women with IGT and concurrent OSAHS and 35 pregnant
women with IGT but not OSAHS were monitored for all night polysomnography (PSG), 
and the apnea hypopnea index (AHI) and the lowest pulse oxygen saturation (LSpO2)
were recorded. The body mass index, glycated serum protein (GSP), interleukin-6
(IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) were measured in these women.
RESULTS: IL-6 and TNF-α levels increased significantly in women with IGT and
OSAHS as compared with those in women without OSAHS. AHI showed significant
positive correlations to GSP, IL-6 and TNF-α, whereas LSpO2 was inversely
correlated to GSP, IL-6 and TNF-α. IL-6 and TNF-α were significantly correlated
to GSP, with correlation coefficients of 0.510 and 0.476, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The inflammatory factors may play important roles in IGT complicated 
by OSAHS in pregnant women, and as a potential risk factor, OSAHS may contribute 
to the occurrence of progression of IGT.

PMID: 21868323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Sleep Breath. 2012 Sep;16(3):657-62. doi: 10.1007/s11325-011-0555-4. Epub 2011
Jul 9.

Effects of 10 days of modest intermittent hypoxia on circulating measures of
inflammation in healthy humans.

Querido JS(1), Sheel AW, Cheema R, Van Eeden S, Mulgrew AT, Ayas NT.

Author information: 
(1)School of Human Kinetics, Osborne Centre, Unit II, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. jquerido@interchange.ubc.ca

PURPOSE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common disease which is associated
with elevated inflammatory markers and adhesion molecules, possibly due to
nightly intermittent hypoxia (IH). The purpose of this study was to test the
hypothesis that IH would increase systemic inflammatory markers in healthy human 
males.
METHODS: Healthy, young male subjects (n = 9; 24 ± 2 years) were exposed to a
single daily isocapnic hypoxia exposure (oxyhemoglobin saturation = 80%, 1 h/day)
for 10 consecutive days. Serum granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor, 
interferon-γ, interleukin-1β, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, leptin, monocyte
chemotactic protein-1, vascular endothelial growth factor, intracellular adhesion
molecule-1, and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 were measured before and
following the 10 days of IH using Luminex.
RESULTS: Nine subjects completed the study (24 ± 2 years; 24 ± 2 kg/m(2)). The
mean oxyhemoglobin saturation was 80.8 ± 1.6% during the hypoxia exposures. There
was no significant change in any of the markers of inflammation (paired t test, P
> 0.2 all cytokines).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that (1) a more substantial or a different
pattern of hypoxemia might be necessary to activate systemic inflammation, (2)
the system may need to be primed before hypoxic exposure, or (3) increases in
inflammatory markers in patients with OSA may be more related to other factors
such as obesity or nocturnal arousal.

PMID: 21743982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Cytokine. 2011 Nov;56(2):318-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.06.002. Epub 2011 Jul
6.

Effect of one night of sleep loss on changes in tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-α) levels in healthy men.

Chennaoui M(1), Sauvet F, Drogou C, Van Beers P, Langrume C, Guillard M, Gourby
B, Bourrilhon C, Florence G, Gomez-Merino D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche Biomédicale des Armées (IRBA), Département
Environnements Opérationnels, Brétigny-sur-Orge, France. mchennaoui@imassa.fr

Total sleep deprivation in humans is associated with increased daytime
sleepiness, decreased performance, elevations in inflammatory cytokines, and
hormonal/metabolic disturbances. To assess the effects of 40 h of total sleep
deprivation (TSD) under constant and well controlled conditions, on plasma levels
of TNF-α and its receptor (TNFR1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), cortisol and C-reactive 
protein (CRP), sleepiness and performance, 12 healthy men (29±3 years)
participated in a 5-days sleep deprivation experiment (two control nights
followed by a night of sleep loss and one recovery night). Between 0800 and 2300 
(i.e. between 25 and 40 h of sleep deprivation), a serial of blood sampling,
multiple sleep latency, subjective levels of sleepiness and reaction time tests
were completed before (day 2: D2) and after (day 4: D4) one night of sleep loss. 
We showed that an acute sleep deprivation (i.e. after 34 and 37 h of sleep
deprivation) induced a significant increase in TNF-α (P<0.01), but there were no 
significant changes in TNFR1, IL-6, cortisol and CRP. In conclusion, our study in
which constant and controlled experimental conditions were realized with healthy 
subjects and in absence of psychological or physical stressors, an acute total
sleep deprivation (from 34 h) was sufficient to induce secretion of
pro-inflammatory cytokine such as TNF-α, a marker more described in chronic sleep
restriction or deprivation and as mediators of excessive sleepiness in humans in 
pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21737301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Int Psychogeriatr. 2011 Nov;23(9):1386-92. doi: 10.1017/S1041610211000810. Epub
2011 May 18.

Increased serum levels of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) 
in women with mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease.

Rasmuson S(1), Näsman B, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, Geriatric Medicine, Umeå 
University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden. sigbritt.rasmuson@germed.umu.se

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that hypercortisolism contributes to the
pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), based on the fact that excess
glucocorticoid exposure has potent adverse effects on the central nervous system.
In contrast, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) has been linked to a broad range of
beneficial physiological effects including neuronal excitability and
neuroprotection and even memory enhancing properties. Of note, proinflammatory
cytokines are present in neuritic plaques (a hallmark of AD) and may regulate
cortisol/DHEA release. In this exploratory study, we hypothesized that there is a
flattened diurnal curve of cortisol and DHEA in mild to moderate AD, linked to
increased cytokine levels.
METHODS: Diurnal profiles of cortisol, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and
DHEA were studied in 15 patients with mild to moderate AD (7 men and 8 women,
75.6 ± 5.5 years) and 15 healthy elderly controls (7 men and 8 women, 73.3 ± 5.8 
years, respectively). Interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), 
and soluble TNF receptors were analyzed.
RESULTS: Women with AD had significantly increased morning levels of ACTH, DHEA, 
and IL-6 compared to healthy elderly women. Cortisol levels were significantly
increased in men with AD at 0300 h versus healthy elderly men, in spite of
slightly decreased ACTH levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest important sex differences in
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis regulation and steroid hormone
clearance in patients with AD. Increased secretion of IL-6 may have a
contributory role in this difference.

PMID: 21729423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Neurosci. 2011 Jun 22;31(25):9075-83. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1537-11.2011.

Constant darkness induces IL-6-dependent depression-like behavior through the
NF-κB signaling pathway.

Monje FJ(1), Cabatic M, Divisch I, Kim EJ, Herkner KR, Binder BR, Pollak DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurophysiology and Neuropharmacology, Medical University of
Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2011 Aug;12(8):435.

Substantial experimental evidence indicates a major role for the circadian system
in mood disorders. Additionally, proinflammatory cytokines have been proposed to 
be involved in the pathogenesis of depression. However, the molecular elements
determining the functional interplay between these two systems in depression have
not been described as yet. Here we investigate whether long-term light
deprivation in the constant darkness (DD) paradigm affects depression-like
behavior in mice and concomitantly modulates the levels of proinflammatory
cytokines. We find that after 4 weeks of DD, mice display depression-like
behavior, which is paralleled by reduced hippocampal cell proliferation. This
chronobiologically induced depressive state is associated with elevated levels of
plasma IL-6 (interleukin-6) and IL-6 and Il1-R1 (interleukin 1 receptor, type I) 
protein levels in the hippocampus and also alters hippocampal protein levels of
the clock genes per2 and npas2. Using pharmacological blockers of the NF-κB
pathway, we provide evidence that the effects of DD on depression-like behavior, 
on hippocampal cell proliferation, on altered expressional levels of brain and
plasma IL-6, and on the modulation of clock gene expression are mediated through 
NF-κB signaling. Moreover, NF-κB activity is enhanced in hippocampal tissue of DD
mice. Mice with a deletion of IL-6, one of the target genes of NF-κB, are
resistant to DD-induced depression-like behavior, which suggests a pivotal role
for this cytokine in the constant darkness mouse model of depression. We here
first describe some of the molecular elements bridging chronobiological and
inflammatory processes in the constant darkness mouse model of depression.

PMID: 21697358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Brain Behav Immun. 2011 Oct;25(7):1482-90. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2011.06.002. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

The associations of adiposity, physical activity and inflammation with fatigue in
older adults.

Valentine RJ(1), Woods JA, McAuley E, Dantzer R, Evans EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology and Community Health, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, USA.

Persistent feelings of fatigue are a widespread complaint reported by older
adults, and are associated with detriments in health and quality of life. The aim
of this study was to determine the influence of weight status, habitual physical 
activity and inflammation, after controlling for common psychosocial variables
such as depression, on perceptions of fatigue in relatively healthy older adults.
Older men and women (N=182, age=69.2±6.7 years, 98 men) were assessed for
adiposity via dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, physical activity (PA) using
accelerometers, systemic inflammation [serum C-reactive protein (CRP),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), sIL-6R and WBC count], fatigue according to the
Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI), sleep using the Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index (PSQI) and depression via the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS). Men
and women reported similar levels of fatigue in all dimensions (p>0.05) except
women reported higher levels of mental fatigue than men (p=0.049). With the
exception of mental fatigue, adiposity was positively, and physical activity was 
inversely associated with all other dimension of fatigue (r range=0.20-0.42, and 
-0.18 to -0.37, respectively). CRP, IL-6 and WBC were also related to several
dimensions of fatigue (r range=0.15-0.26). Regression analyses revealed that
after controlling for other factors, including depression and sleep quality,
adiposity independently explained a significant amount of the variance in general
and physical fatigue. In addition to depression and sleep quality, adiposity may 
represent a potential target for reducing fatigue in older adults.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21693185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2011 Jun;137(6):576-82. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2011.86.

Effect of fluticasone furoate on interleukin 6 secretion from adenoid tissues in 
children with obstructive sleep apnea.

Esteitie R(1), Emani J, Sharma S, Suskind DL, Baroody FM.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The University of Chicago
Medical Center, IL 60637, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of intranasal corticosteroid therapy on
T-regulatory cells and other inflammatory cytokines in adenoid tissues in
children with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.
DESIGN: Randomized, prospective, exploratory study.
SETTING: Academic pediatric otolaryngology practice in a tertiary care children's
hospital.
PATIENTS: Participants included 24 children between the ages of 2 and 12 years
who were undergoing adenotonsillectomy for polysomnogram-documented obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome.
INTERVENTION: Children were randomized to either no treatment (n = 13) or
treatment with fluticasone furoate nasal spray, 55 μg/nostril daily (n = 11), for
2 weeks before adenotonsillectomy. Adenoid tissue was obtained at the time of the
procedure.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The number of tissue T-regulatory cells, as determined by 
staining with FOXP3, CD4, and CD25, was the primary outcome measure. Staining for
interleukin (IL)-10 and transforming growth factor-β protein by
immunohistochemistry, and adenoid mononuclear cell spontaneous and induced
release of cytokines (IL-10, IL-6, IL-12, IL-13, tumor necrosis factor, and
transforming growth factor β) were secondary outcomes.
RESULTS: Cells isolated from fluticasone furoate nasal spray-treated adenoid
tissue released significantly less IL-6 spontaneously as well as upon stimulation
with anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody (P = .05) compared with nontreated adenoid
tissue. There were no significant differences in the number of CD4/FOXP3-,
CD25/FOXP3-, or transforming growth factor β-positive cells. Intensity of
staining for IL-10 was also comparable between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we show reduction of IL-6, a proinflammatory
cytokine, in adenoid tissue obtained from children with obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome treated with fluticasone furoate nasal spray. This reduction could
contribute to the clinical efficacy of this class of medications in the treatment
of childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.

PMID: 21690510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2011 Sep;301(3):L296-306. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00086.2011. Epub 2011 Jun 10.

Organic dust augments nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain expression via an
NF-{kappa}B pathway to negatively regulate inflammatory responses.

Poole JA(1), Kielian T, Wyatt TA, Gleason AM, Stone J, Palm K, West WW, Romberger
DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep & Allergy Division; Dept. of Medicine, Univ.
of Nebraska Medical Center, 985300 The Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE
68198-5300, USA. japoole@unmc.edu

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) is involved in innate immune
responses to peptidoglycan degradation products. Peptidoglycans are important
mediators of organic dust-induced airway diseases in exposed agriculture workers;
however, the role of NOD2 in response to complex organic dust is unknown.
Monocytes/macrophages were exposed to swine facility organic dust extract (ODE), 
whereupon NOD2 expression was evaluated by real-time PCR and Western blot. ODE
induced significant NOD2 mRNA and protein expression at 24 and 48 h,
respectively, which was mediated via a NF-κB signaling pathway as opposed to a
TNF-α autocrine/paracrine mechanism. Specifically, NF-κB translocation increased 
rapidly following ODE stimulation as demonstrated by EMSA, and inhibition of the 
NF-κB pathway significantly reduced ODE-induced NOD2 expression. However, there
was no significant reduction in ODE-induced NOD2 gene expression when TNF-α was
inhibited or absent. Next, it was determined whether NOD2 regulated ODE-induced
inflammatory cytokine production. Knockdown of NOD2 expression by small
interfering RNA resulted in increased CXCL8 and IL-6, but not TNF-α production in
response to ODE. Similarly, primary lung macrophages from NOD2 knockout mice
demonstrated increased IL-6, CXCL1, and CXCL1, but not TNF-α, expression. Lastly,
a higher degree of airway inflammation occurred in the absence of NOD2 following 
acute (single) and repetitive (3 wk) ODE exposure in an established in vivo
murine model. In summary, ODE-induced NOD2 expression is directly dependent on
NF-κB signaling, and NOD2 is a negative regulator of complex, organic
dust-induced inflammatory cytokine/chemokine production in mononuclear
phagocytes.

PMCID: PMC3174739
PMID: 21665963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Br J Anaesth. 2011 Aug;107(2):193-201. doi: 10.1093/bja/aer149. Epub 2011 Jun 9.

Melatonin and structurally similar compounds have differing effects on
inflammation and mitochondrial function in endothelial cells under conditions
mimicking sepsis.

Lowes DA(1), Almawash AM, Webster NR, Reid VL, Galley HF.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, School of Medicine and
Dentistry, University of Aberdeen, UK.

BACKGROUND: Development of organ dysfunction associated with sepsis is due in
part to oxidative damage to mitochondria. Melatonin regulates the sleep-wake
cycle and also has potent antioxidant activity. The aim of this study was to
determine the effects of melatonin and other structurally related compounds on
mitochondrial function, endogenous glutathione (GSH), and control of cytokine
expression under conditions mimicking sepsis.
METHODS: Human endothelial cells were treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) plus 
peptidoglycan G (PepG) to simulate sepsis, in the presence of melatonin,
6-hydroxymelatonin, tryptamine, or indole-3-carboxylic acid. Nuclear factor κB
(NFκB) activation, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8, total glutathione, mitochondrial 
membrane potential, and metabolic activity were measured.
RESULTS: LPS and PepG treatment resulted in elevated IL-6 and IL-8 levels
preceded by activation of NFκB (all P<0.0001). Treatment with all four compounds 
resulted in lower IL-6 and IL-8 levels, and lower NFκB activation (P<0.0001).
Loss of mitochondrial membrane potential and endogenous glutathione was seen when
cells were exposed to LPS/PepG, but these were maintained in cells co-treated
with melatonin, tryptamine, or 6-hydroxymelatonin (P<0.05), but not
indole-3-carboxylic acid. Metabolic activity decreased after exposure to LPS/PepG
and was maintained by melatonin and 6-hydroxymelatonin at the highest
concentrations only.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that in addition to melatonin, other structurally
related indoleamine compounds have effects on NFκB activation and cytokine
expression, GSH, mitochondrial membrane potential, and metabolic activity in
endothelial cells cultured under conditions mimicking sepsis. Further work is
needed to determine whether these compounds represent therapeutic approaches for 
disrupting the oxidative stress-inflammatory response signalling pathway in
sepsis.

PMID: 21659405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cytokine. 2011 Aug;55(2):318-23. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.05.005. Epub 2011 May
31.

Is there a morning-to-evening difference in the acute IL-6 and cortisol responses
to resistance exercise?

Pledge D(1), Grosset JF, Onambélé-Pearson GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Exercise and Sport Science, Manchester Metropolitan University, 
Crewe Green Road, Crewe, CW1 5DU, UK.

Exercise training is known to induce a molecular adaptation process involving
inflammatory responses. However any time-of-day effect of exercise on
inflammatory responses remains unknown. The aim of the present study was to
investigate whether acute bouts of intense exercise performed at different times 
of the day would affect the release Interleukin-6 (IL-6), one of the most
abundant cytokines in mammalian endocrine response to exercise. Cortisol levels
were measured as a confirmation of correct timing of exercise and to determine
any impact it may have on the cytokine release. Twelve healthy male participants 
carried out 30 min of intense exercise (3 sets of 8-12 repetitions for 4
resistance exercises at 70% of 1RM) in morning (08:15-09:00 h), and evening
(18:15-19:00 h) sessions. An 8h fasting period was required before each exercise 
session. Blood samples were taken immediately pre and post each exercise sessions
to determine IL-6 and cortisol levels. Our data show that whilst the training
group showed no post-exercise changes in serum_IL-6 levels (P>0.05), the control 
group on the other hand showed significant time-of-day modifications in
serum_IL-6 levels (P=0.008). Moreover, a significant interaction between
intervention phase (pre-post training, AM vs. PM) and group (Exercise vs.
Control) is evidenced in terms of serum_IL-6 levels (P=0.014). This interaction
however was nullified when the between group differences at baseline were
partialled out in a covariate analysis (P>0.05). We also found that the main
effect of experimental phase on Cortisol was present in both the trained
(P=0.004) and control groups (p<0.001) with no significant interaction (P>0.05). 
Based on the current data, we would propose that exercise and/or time-of-day
would not interfere with clinical endocrine profiling of IL-6 in a population.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21632260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2011 Jun 1;236(6):658-71. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2011.011028.
Epub 2011 May 12.

Role of nuclear factor κB-mediated inflammatory pathways in cancer-related
symptoms and their regulation by nutritional agents.

Gupta SC(1), Kim JH, Kannappan R, Reuter S, Dougherty PM, Aggarwal BB.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Research Laboratory, Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA

Cancer is a disease characterized by dysregulation of multiple genes and is
associated with symptoms such as cachexia, anorexia, fatigue, depression,
neuropathic pain, anxiety, cognitive impairment, sleep disorders and delirium
(acute confusion state) in medically ill patients. These symptoms are caused by
either the cancer itself or the cancer treatment. During the past decade,
increasing evidence has shown that the dysregulation of inflammatory pathways
contributes to the expression of these symptoms. Cancer patients have been found 
to have higher levels of proinflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6. The
nuclear factor (NF)-κB is a major mediator of inflammatory pathways. Therefore,
anti-inflammatory agents that can modulate the NF-κB activation and inflammatory 
pathways may have potential in improving cancer-related symptoms in patients.
Because of their multitargeting properties, low cost, low toxicity and immediate 
availability, natural agents have gained considerable attention for prevention
and treatment of cancer-related symptoms. How NF-κB and inflammatory pathways
contribute to cancer-related symptoms is the focus of this review. We will also
discuss how nutritional agents such as curcumin, genistein, resveratrol,
epigallocatechin gallate and lycopene can modulate inflammatory pathways and
thereby reduce cancer-related symptoms in patients.

PMCID: PMC3141285
PMID: 21565893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2011;32(2):148-53.

The role of renal function loss on circadian misalignment of cytokines EPO,
IGF-1, IL-6 and TNF-alfa in chronic renal disease.

van der Putten K(1), Koch B, van Someren E, Wielders J, Ter Wee P, Nagtegaal E,
Gaillard C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Meander MC, Amersfoort, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic inflammation plays a pivotal role in the development of renal 
disease. Circadian sleep-wake rhythm is disturbed in renal disease. Awareness of 
other disturbed rhythms, such as inflammation processes, can affect the treatment
of patients with renal disease. Knowledge of possibly related circadian
misalignment of the cytokines erythropoietin (EPO), Insulin Growth Factor-1
(IGF-1) and interleukins (IL) however is limited. We therefore performed an
observational study. The objective of this study was to characterize levels of
EPO, IGF-1 and inflammation markers IL-6 and TNF-α, related to renal function.
METHODS: The study population consisted of patients with various degrees of renal
function, admitted to our hospital. During 24 hours, blood of 28 subjects with
various degrees of renal function was collected every 2 hours. The patients were 
stable, not acutely ill and they were waiting for a procedure, such as elective
surgery. Circadian parameters of EPO, IGF-1, IL-6 and TNF-α were measured in
serum and were correlated with glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and Hb, using
Pearson correlations.
RESULTS: Although diurnal variations in EPO level were found in 15 out of 28
patients, the curves did not show a consistent phase. The presence of an EPO
rhythm was not related to GFR. No diurnal rhythm could be detected for IGF-1,
IL-6 and TNF-α. Mean levels of IGF-1 were correlated inversely to mean levels of 
EPO (p=0.03). When divided based on GFR and Hb subjects with GFR 10-30 ml/min and
lower Hb had the highest IGF-1 levels (p=0.02). A relationship between Il-6,
TNF-α and EPO or GFR was not found.
CONCLUSION: The existence of a circadian (mis)alignment of EPO, IGF-1, IL-6 and
TNF-α was not found. The association between high IGF-1 and low Hb suggests that 
EPO and IGF-1 have an alternating role, dependent on GFR, in stimulating
erythropoiesis. These results could have consequences for the treatment of
anemia.

PMID: 21552189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Metabolism. 2011 Oct;60(10):1449-55. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.02.013. Epub
2011 May 6.

Resting energy expenditure and protein turnover are increased in patients with
severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Kao CC(1), Hsu JW, Bandi V, Hanania NA, Kheradmand F, Jahoor F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
ck692121@bcm.tmc.edu

The mechanisms leading to weight loss in patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) are poorly understood. Changes in protein metabolism and
systemic inflammation may contribute to increased resting energy expenditure
(REE) in COPD, leading to an energy imbalance and loss of fat and fat-free mass. 
The objective of this study was to determine first whether REE was increased in
patients with COPD and, second, whether this was associated with increased
protein turnover and/or systemic inflammation. Resting energy expenditure was
determined using indirect calorimetry in 14 stable outpatients with severe COPD
(7 with low and 7 with preserved body mass indices) and 7 healthy controls.
Endogenous leucine flux, leucine oxidation, and nonoxidative disposal, indices of
whole-body protein breakdown, catabolism, and synthesis, were measured using
intravenous infusions of (13)C-bicarbonate and 1-(13)C-leucine. Total body water,
from which fat-free mass and fat mass were calculated, was determined using an
intravenous bolus of deuterated water. Plasma markers of systemic inflammation
were also measured. As a group, subjects with COPD had increased REE adjusted for
fat-free mass (P < .001) and faster rates of endogenous leucine flux (P = .006)
and nonoxidative leucine disposal (P = .002) compared with controls. There was a 
significant correlation between REE and both endogenous leucine flux (P = .02)
and nonoxidative leucine disposal (P = .008). Plasma concentrations of the
inflammatory markers C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 were not different
between COPD subjects and controls. Increased rates of protein turnover are
associated with increased REE and loss of fat-free mass in COPD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3176951
PMID: 21550084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Scand J Rheumatol Suppl. 2011;125:28-39. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2011.566438.

How should impaired morning function in rheumatoid arthritis be treated?

Buttgereit F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité University
Medicine, Berlin, Germany. frank.buttgereit@charite.de

Patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) commonly experience morning symptoms of
joint stiffness and pain that result in impaired function. However, current
treatment options are limited. The management of impaired morning function is
based primarily on non-pharmacological approaches, including simple or short
exercises, application of heat or a hot shower or bath, and delaying activities
until later in the day. Although it seems that the majority of patients follow
the management advice they are given by rheumatologists, symptoms persist. In
recent years, only a minority of clinical studies have assessed the impact on
morning symptoms of pharmacological treatments for RA. The paucity of data makes 
it difficult to evaluate systematically the ability of current treatments to
improve morning function. However, treatment seems to be suboptimal; in a
pan-European survey of 518 rheumatologists, 61% considered that current treatment
options do not address impaired morning function specifically, and 68% considered
there is a need for new treatment options. Understanding the pathophysiology of
circadian symptoms may provide the key to improving treatment of impaired morning
function. In patients with morning symptoms of RA, there may be insufficient
endogenous cortisol released during the night to counter elevated levels of the
pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin (IL)-6. Delivering exogenous
glucocorticoid during the night was found to reduce IL-6 levels and reduce
morning stiffness, but was inconvenient for patients. However, this
chronotherapeutic approach has now been facilitated by the development of
modified-release prednisone tablets. Taken at bedtime (approximately 10:00 pm),
these tablets give programmed delivery of prednisone around 4 h later, at the
optimal time to suppress IL-6. Clinical studies suggest that morning stiffness in
patients with RA could be treated successfully with the use of low-dose
modified-release prednisone.

PMID: 21529308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Scand J Rheumatol Suppl. 2011;125:1-5. doi: 10.3109/03009742.2011.566433.

Morning symptoms in rheumatoid arthritis: a defining characteristic and marker of
active disease.

Sierakowski S(1), Cutolo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Diseases, Medical University of
Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland.

Many human biological processes are regulated by circadian rhythms, which follow 
24-h cycles and involve the neuroendocrine and immune systems. Pathological
manifestations of this system may also follow circadian rhythms. In rheumatoid
arthritis (RA), clinical symptoms of joint stiffness, pain, and functional
disability are commonly most severe in the early morning. These symptoms closely 
follow the circadian rhythm of the pro-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin (IL)-6.
In RA, the increase in nocturnal anti-inflammatory cortisol secretion is
insufficient to suppress ongoing inflammation, resulting in the morning symptoms 
characteristic of RA. Established diagnostic criteria for RA include morning
stiffness, although it is not part of the more recent classification criteria
developed to guide early treatment decisions. Measures that are widely used to
monitor disease control also omit morning stiffness. However, such measures may
not capture all disease activity, and one in six patients in remission or with
low disease activity still experiences prolonged morning stiffness. Such findings
suggest that morning symptoms in RA remain an important marker of active disease 
that should continue to be monitored.

PMID: 21529303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2011 Aug;109(2):138-43. doi:
10.1111/j.1742-7843.2011.00707.x. Epub 2011 May 6.

Resveratrol impairs the release of steroid-resistant cytokines from bacterial
endotoxin-exposed alveolar macrophages in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Knobloch J(1), Hag H, Jungck D, Urban K, Koch A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Clinic III for Pneumology, Allergology and Sleep Medicine, University 
Hospital Bergmannsheil, Bochum, Germany.

Airway inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is believed
to be insensitive to corticosteroids. However, corticosteroids are recommended in
COPD (GOLD stages III, IV) with frequent exacerbations. Resveratrol has
anti-inflammatory properties and could be an alternative to corticosteroids in
COPD therapy. We investigated the effect of dexamethasone versus resveratrol on
the release of COPD-related inflammatory mediators (IL-6, IL-8, GM-CSF and MCP-1)
and matrix-metalloprotease-9 (MMP-9) from alveolar macrophages exposed to
gram-negative bacterial endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS). We compared
never-smokers, current smokers without airway obstruction and current smokers
with COPD. The cytokines and MMP-9 were measured in cell culture supernatants
with ELISA. The release of IL-8 and MMP-9 from LPS-exposed alveolar macrophages
was increased in COPD, the release of GM-CSF and IL-6 was decreased in COPD and
the release of MCP-1 was without differences between the cohorts. Dexamethasone
impaired the release of all cytokines and MMP-9 from LPS-exposed alveolar
macrophages of all cohorts, but for IL-8 and GM-CSF this effect was reduced in
COPD. In alveolar macrophages of COPD, there was an almost complete reduction in 
IL-6 release but only a partial reduction in IL-8, GM-CSF, MCP-1 and MMP-9
release demonstrating a partial corticosteroid-insensitivity. In contrast,
resveratrol almost completely reduced the release of all cytokines and MMP-9
without significant differences between the cohorts. Our data provide evidence
for a corticosteroid resistance of alveolar macrophage-dependent inflammatory
responses induced by gram-negative bacteria in COPD and thus question the utility
of corticosteroids in COPD therapy. Instead, resveratrol may prove an
alternative.

© 2011 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology © 2011 Nordic
Pharmacological Society.

PMID: 21447053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Sleep Med. 2011 May;12(5):518-22. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.09.005. Epub 2011 Mar
25.

Maternal snoring during pregnancy is associated with enhanced fetal
erythropoiesis--a preliminary study.

Tauman R(1), Many A, Deutsch V, Arvas S, Ascher-Landsberg J, Greenfeld M, Sivan
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Sleep Center, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel Aviv Souraski Medical
Center, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

OBJECTIVE AND BACKGROUND: Snoring is common among pregnant women and early
reports suggest that it may bear a risk to the fetus. Increased fetal
erythropoiesis manifested by elevated circulating nucleated red blood cells
(nRBCs) has been found in complicated pregnancies involving fetal hypoxia. Both
erythropoietin (EPO) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) mediate elevation of circulating
nRBCs. The intermittent hypoxia and systemic inflammation elicited by
sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) could affect fetal erythropoiesis during
pregnancy. We hypothesized that maternal snoring will result in increased levels 
of fetal circulating nRBCs via increased concentrations of EPO, IL-6, or both.
METHODS: Women of singleton uncomplicated full-term pregnancies were recruited
during labor and completed a designated questionnaire. Umbilical cord blood was
collected immediately after birth and analyzed for nRBCs, plasma EPO and plasma
IL-6 concentrations. Newborn data were retrieved from medical records.
RESULTS: One hundred and twenty-two women were recruited. Thirty-nine percent of 
women reported habitual snoring during pregnancy. Cord blood levels of
circulating nRBCs, EPO and IL-6 were significantly elevated in habitual snorers
compared with non-snorers (p = 0.03, 0.005 and 0.01; respectively). No
differences in maternal characteristics or newborn crude outcomes were found.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal snoring during pregnancy is associated with enhanced fetal 
erythropoiesis manifested by increased cord blood levels of nRBCs, EPO and IL-6. 
This provides preliminary evidence that maternal snoring is associated with
subtle alterations in markers of fetal well being.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21440495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Sleep Breath. 2012 Jun;16(2):349-54. doi: 10.1007/s11325-011-0499-8. Epub 2011
Mar 1.

Increased systemic inflammation overnight correlates with insulin resistance
among children evaluated for obstructive sleep apnea.

Deboer MD(1), Mendoza JP, Liu L, Ford G, Yu PL, Gaston BM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, P.O. Box 800386, Charlottesville, VA
22908, USA. deboer@virginia.edu

PURPOSE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in children is associated with obesity,
insulin resistance, and elevated baseline inflammation as measured by
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP). Our goal was to evaluate whether
inflammation increases overnight among children suspected of having OSA and to
determine whether worsened inflammation is associated with the degree of OSA
severity, obesity, and/or insulin resistance.
METHODS: Twenty-three children with clinical suspicion of OSA underwent a sleep
study. Levels of hsCRP were tested the evening before and morning after the sleep
study. Fasting insulin and glucose levels were measured from which the
homeostasis model of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) was calculated. Linear
correlations were performed to evaluate relationships between hsCRP levels at
baseline and change overnight (ΔhsCRP) vs. HOMA-IR, body mass index (BMI)
z-score, and sleep study parameters related to O(2) saturation and the
apnea-hypopnea index (AHI).
RESULTS: Among children with OSA and the entire cohort, hsCRP values were
correlated with HOMA-IR and BMI z-scores. HOMA-IR but not BMI z-score correlated 
with ΔhsCRP overnight in the entire cohort. Sleep study parameters, including AHI
mean O(2) saturation overnight, REM O(2) nadir, and non-REM O(2) nadir were not
correlated with hsCRP or ΔhsCRP overnight.
CONCLUSION: Among children being evaluated for OSA, degree of insulin resistance 
may be an important determinant of increased systemic inflammation overnight.
Sleep study markers did not correlate with ΔhsCRP, leaving uncertain the role of 
OSA in increasing inflammation overnight. Further studies are needed to explore
these associations and their potential mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3253221
PMID: 21360253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Sleep. 2011 Mar 1;34(3):371-7.

Disturbed glucoregulatory response to food intake after moderate sleep
restriction.

Schmid SM(1), Hallschmid M, Jauch-Chara K, Wilms B, Lehnert H, Born J, Schultes
B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Epidemiological studies point to a strong association between
short sleep duration and the development of diabetes. We examined the hypothesis 
that short-term sleep loss decreases glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity
and, if so, how these changes relate to hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)
secretory activity and markers of subclinical inflammation.
DESIGN: In a balanced, within-subject design, circulating glucose, insulin,
C-peptide, glucagon, ACTH, cortisol, and IL-6 levels were closely monitored
during a 15-h daytime period following 2 nights of restricted sleep (02:45-07:00)
and 2 nights of regular sleep (bedtime 22:45-07:00), respectively.
SETTING: Time-deprivation suite within a university medical center sleep
laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: 15 healthy, unmedicated normal-weight men.
INTERVENTION: Sleep restriction.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Pre-breakfast concentrations of blood parameters were
unchanged following sleep manipulation (P > 0.30). However, insulin and glucose
peak responses to breakfast intake at 08:00 were distinctly increased by sleep
restriction in comparison to regular sleep (398.5 ± 57.4 vs. 284.3 ± 51.5 pmol/L 
and 6.8 ± 0.3 vs. 6.1 ± 0.3 mmol/L, respectively; all P < 0.02), while glucagon
responses were blunted by sleep loss (P = 0.03). There were no differences in
circulating ACTH, cortisol, and IL-6 concentrations between the 2 conditions (all
P > 0.25).
CONCLUSIONS: Data indicate an impairment of glucose tolerance after 2 days of
sleep restriction to ~4 h that appears to be primarily caused by a reduction in
insulin sensitivity. Unchanged HPA secretory activity and IL-6 concentrations
argue against a mediation of these effects by stress-related or inflammatory
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3041714
PMID: 21358855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Eur Respir J. 2011 Sep;38(3):594-602. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00139810. Epub 2011
Feb 10.

Airway inflammation is augmented by obesity and fatty acids in asthma.

Scott HA(1), Gibson PG, Garg ML, Wood LG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Hunter Medical Research Institute,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2012 Jun;39(6):1547-9.

Obesity and asthma are associated, but the mechanism(s) of the association have
yet to be elucidated. The aim of this study was to assess airway inflammation in 
relation to obesity and plasma fatty acids in males and females with and without 
asthma. Obese (n=68) and nonobese (n=47) adults with asthma, and obese (n=16) and
nonobese (n=63) healthy controls had induced sputum and venous blood samples
analysed for inflammatory markers. There was a positive interaction between
obesity and asthma on sputum neutrophil percentage (p=0.012) and C-reactive
protein level (p=0.003). Although sputum eosinophil percentage was elevated in
asthma (p=0.001), there was no effect of obesity (p=0.16). Sputum neutrophil
percentage was positively associated with body mass index in females with asthma 
(β=1.015, 95% CI 0.258-1.772; p=0.009) and neutrophilic asthma was present in a
greater proportion of obese compared with non-obese females (42.9% versus 16.2%; 
p=0.017). In males with asthma, sputum neutrophil percentage was positively
associated with total plasma saturated fatty acids (β=0.108, 95% CI 0.036-0.180; 
p=0.004) and negatively with monounsaturated fatty acids (β= -0.068, 95% CI
-0.131- -0.005; p=0.035). This was the first study to demonstrate an increase in 
neutrophilic airway inflammation in obese asthma. This relationship was
significant only in females with asthma. In males, saturated and monounsaturated 
fatty acids were important predictors of neutrophilic airway inflammation in
asthma.

PMID: 21310876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 15;70(2):175-82. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.12.006.
Epub 2011 Jan 31.

Chronic low-grade inflammation in elderly persons is associated with altered
tryptophan and tyrosine metabolism: role in neuropsychiatric symptoms.

Capuron L(1), Schroecksnadel S, Féart C, Aubert A, Higueret D, Barberger-Gateau
P, Layé S, Fuchs D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Nutrition and Genetics, INRA, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
ucile.capuron@bordeaux.inra.fr

Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Jul 15;70(2):111-2.

BACKGROUND: Neuropsychiatric symptoms are common complaints of elderly persons.
Recent data suggest that chronic low-grade inflammation, a fundamental
characteristic of aging, plays a role. Effects might rely on the influence of
inflammation on the activity of two enzymatic pathways, the
indoleamine-2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and the guanosine-triphosphate-cyclohydrolase-1
(GTP-CH1) pathways, which are involved in the biosynthesis of monoamines. The
present study assessed this possibility in 284 healthy elderly subjects drawn
from the Three-City cohort.
METHODS: Assays included the measurement of serum interleukin-6 and
C-reactive-protein, as inflammatory markers; tryptophan, kynurenine, and their
ratio as index of IDO activity; and neopterin, phenylalanine, tyrosine, and
nitrite, as markers of GTP-CH1 activity. In addition, structured assessments of
depressive symptomatology, fatigue, and general behavioral/neurovegetative
symptoms were performed.
RESULTS: As expected, age correlated significantly with concentrations of immune 
markers and neuropsychiatric symptoms. Increased inflammation was related to
reduced tryptophan concentrations and increased kynurenine levels, suggestive of 
IDO-induced increased tryptophan catabolism. In addition, inflammation was
associated with increases in neopterin and nitrite levels and in phenylalanine
concentrations at the expense of tyrosine. Interestingly, increased tryptophan
catabolism was associated with the depressive symptoms of lassitude, reduced
motivation, anorexia, and pessimism. In contrast, variations in markers of
GTP-CH1 activity correlated more with neurovegetative symptoms, including sleep
disturbance, digestive symptoms, fatigue, sickness, and motor symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings show that chronic low-grade inflammation in aging is 
associated with alterations in enzymatic pathways involved in monoamine
metabolism and suggest that these alterations might participate in the
pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric symptoms in elderly persons.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 21277567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2011 May;113(4):316-22. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2010.12.013. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Injection of interferon-beta in the morning decreases flu-like syndrome in many
patients with multiple sclerosis.

Nadjar Y(1), Coutelas E, Prouteau P, Panzer F, Paquet D, Saint-Val C, Créange A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Henri Mondor, AP-HP, Université Paris Est,
Créteil, France.

BACKGROUND: Although it is recommended that interferon-beta (IFNβ) injections be 
administered in the evening, it is possible that morning injections could more
effectively decrease interleukin 6 secretion.
METHODS: This study evaluated the effects of switching from an evening injection 
of IFNβ to a morning injection on the intensity of flu-like syndrome in patients 
with multiple sclerosis (MS). We performed an intervention study that consisted
of a quantitative evaluation of IFNβ-related flu-like syndrome in a cohort of 105
MS patients. Patients with persistent flu-like reactions who injected IFNβ in the
evening were encouraged to switch to morning injections. After one month, we
evaluated various quantitative and qualitative changes (e.g., severity of
flu-like syndrome, sleep quality, antipyretic drug use).
RESULTS: Of the 98 patients (93%) who injected IFNβ in the evening, 88 (85%) had 
a persistent flu-like syndrome (the severity score was 3.92±0.26). A total of 50 
(57%) patients switched to morning injections. One month after changing the
injection time, 29 patients (58%) reported that their flu-like syndrome was
decreased, 11 (24%) thought that it was unchanged and 9 (18%) thought that it was
increased (p=0.014). In addition, 23 patients (48%) reported improved sleep
(p=0.001), and 33 (68%) patients chose to continue morning injections, whereas 17
(32%) patients switched back to evening injections (p=0.024). Quantitative
measures, however, indicated that there was no change in the severity of flu-like
syndrome or the number of antipyretic doses taken for its management.
CONCLUSION: Morning injections qualitatively improved IFNβ-related flu-like
syndrome and sleep. A change in IFNβ injection time from evening to morning could
benefit a significant proportion of patients with MS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21269761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Clin Transl Sci. 2010 Dec;3(6):337-9.

Study of the relationship between the interleukin-6 gene and obstructive sleep
apnea.

Larkin EK(1), Patel SR, Zhu X, Tracy RP, Jenny NS, Reiner AP, Walston J, Redline 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Pulmonary and Critical Care, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tenessee, USA. Emma.Larkin@vanderbilt.edu

PMCID: PMC3078635
PMID: 21207764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2012 Jul;22(7):583-90. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2010.10.007. Epub 2010 Dec 28.

Effect of weight loss on inflammation in patients with mild obstructive sleep
apnea.

Sahlman J(1), Seppä J, Herder C, Peltonen M, Peuhkurinen K, Gylling H, Vanninen
E, Tukiainen H, Punnonen K, Partinen M, Uusitupa M, Tuomilehto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio,
Finland. johanna.sahlman@fimnet.fi

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Inflammation may be one mediating mechanism for
cardiovascular diseases in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). However, little is
known about subclinical inflammation or the effect of lifestyle intervention on
inflammation in early stages of OSA. The aim of this substudy of an existing
randomized controlled trial, with post hoc analyses, was to determine the impact 
of lifestyle changes aimed at weight reduction on inflammatory biomarkers in
overweight patients with mild OSA.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients were randomized to supervised intensive lifestyle
intervention group (N=28) or to control group (N=31), which received routine
lifestyle advices. Circulating concentrations of pro- and anti-inflammatory
mediators were measured before and after the 1-year intervention. The
concentrations of two pro-inflammatory mediators, high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hsCRP) and interleukin (IL)-6, decreased significantly in both groups.
Although the changes in inflammatory biomarkers favored the supervised lifestyle 
intervention, the only significant reduction observed between the groups was for 
the anti-inflammatory IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1RA). The change in hsCRP was 
associated with apnea-hypopnea index, and improving night-time oxygen saturation 
was related to tumor necrosis factor alpha. IL-1RA and IL-6 were associated with 
insulin metabolism.
CONCLUSION: Weight loss resulted in reductions in concentrations of some pro- and
anti-inflammatory mediators in overweight patients with mild OSA, overall
favoring the supervised lifestyle intervention. These findings suggest that more 
intensive treatment of obesity in OSA patients might be well-justified.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21193295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Clin J Pain. 2011 Jan;27(1):35-41.

Chronic low back pain, sleep disturbance, and interleukin-6.

Heffner KL(1), France CR, Trost Z, Ng HM, Pigeon WR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rochester Center for Mind-Body Research, University 
of Rochester Medical Center, 300 Crittenden Boulevard, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. 
Kathi_Heffner@URMC.Rochester.edu

OBJECTIVES: Sleep disturbance is a common comorbidity of chronic pain.
Inflammatory processes are dysregulated in sleep disturbance and also contribute 
to pain sensitivity. Thus, inflammation may play an important role in
bidirectional associations between pain and sleep. Little is known about
concurrent relationships among chronic pain, sleep, and inflammation. The aim of 
our study was to examine associations between sleep disturbance and circulating
levels of the inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-6 (IL-6), in individuals with
and without chronic low back pain.
METHODS: Sex-matched and age-matched adults with chronic low back pain (CLBP;
n=25) or without chronic pain (controls; n=25)completed measures of sleep quality
in the past month and depressive symptoms in the past week, and provided a blood 
sample for IL-6. The next morning, participants reported their sleep quality the 
previous night and their current experience of morning pain.
RESULTS: Individuals with CLBP had more sleep disturbance than controls.
Circulating IL-6 levels were similar for the 2 groups; however, in adults with
CLBP, poorer sleep quality was associated with higher IL-6 levels, and both sleep
and IL-6 related to pain reports. Unlike CLBP participants, controls showed
normal, age-related increases in IL-6 levels, whereas sleep quality was unrelated
to IL-6 levels. Depressive symptoms could not fully explain the observed
associations.
DISCUSSION: Inflammatory processes may play a significant role in the cycles of
pain and sleep disturbance. Clinical interventions that improve sleep and reduce 
concomitant inflammatory dysregulation hold promise for chronic pain management.

PMCID: PMC3058637
PMID: 21188850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Psychosom Med. 2011 Jan;73(1):16-22. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e31820573b6. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Childhood adversity heightens the impact of later-life caregiving stress on
telomere length and inflammation.

Kiecolt-Glaser JK(1), Gouin JP, Weng NP, Malarkey WB, Beversdorf DQ, Glaser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Institute for Behavioral Medicine Research, Ohio
State University College of Medicine, 460 Medical Center Drive, Columbus, OH
43210, USA. Janice.Kiecolt-Glaser@osumc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To address the question of whether childhood abuse and other
adversities have lasting, detectable consequences for inflammation and cell aging
late in life, and whether the effects are large enough to be discernible beyond
that of a major chronic stressor, dementia family caregiving. Previous research
on the physical health consequences of childhood abuse and other adversities has 
been based on data from young or middle-aged adults.
METHOD: In this community sample of 132 healthy older adults (mean age = 69.70
years; standard deviation = 10.14), including 58 dementia family caregivers and
74 non-caregivers, blood samples were analyzed for interleukin (IL)-6, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-α, and telomere length, a measure of cell aging. Depressive
symptoms were assessed by the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression
Scale.
RESULTS: After controlling for age, caregiving status, gender, body mass index,
exercise, and sleep, the presence of multiple childhood adversities was related
to both heightened IL-6 (0.37 ± 0.03 log10 pg/mL versus 0.44 ± 0.03 log10 pg/mL) 
and shorter telomeres (6.51 ± 0.17 Kb versus 5.87 ± 0.20 Kb), compared with the
absence of adversity; the telomere difference could translate into a 7- to
15-year difference in life span. Abuse was associated with heightened IL-6 and
TNF-α levels; for TNF-α, this relationship was magnified in caregivers compared
with controls. Moreover, abuse and caregiving status were associated
significantly and independently with higher levels of depressive symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: Adverse childhood events are related to continued vulnerability
among older adults, enhancing the impact of chronic stressors. Childhood
adversities cast a very long shadow.

PMCID: PMC3051180
PMID: 21148804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Mar;76(3):453-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2010.11.020. Epub 2010 
Dec 13.

Hypothesis: Role for the circadian Clock system and sleep in the pathogenesis of 
adhesions and chronic pelvic pain?

Sadek K(1), Macklon N, Bruce K, Cagampang F, Cheong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Origins of Health and Disease (DOHaD), University of
Southampton School of Medicine, Coxford Road, Southampton SO16 5YA, United
Kingdom. k.h.sadek@soton.ac.uk

Intra-peritoneal adhesions ensuing from surgery or infection may lead to chronic 
pelvic pain, bowel obstruction, infertility and additional invasive surgery to
resolve adhesion-related complications. As a result adhesions are a major
clinical, social and economic concern. The cumulative year-on-year direct costs
of adhesion-related readmissions for a 10-year period are more than £ 569
million. The degree of intra-abdominal adhesion formation in an individual
patient after a surgical or infective insult remains difficult to predict. This
reflects a lack of understanding as to the underlying aetiologies. Several
different mechanisms leading to adhesion formation and re-formation have been
proposed. These include abnormal modulations in inflammatory status, fibrinolytic
pathways and matrix remodelling. A number of preventative strategies have been
designed accordingly. However, although each individual model offers specific
insights into the aetiology of adhesion formation, none have been shown to
provide the basis for a highly effective clinical intervention. A unifying
fundamental mechanism remains elusive. In this article we propose that such a
mechanism can be found within the molecular control of circadian rhythms and
"Clock" gene biology. A number of physiological processes demonstrating circadian
variation have been shown to involve 'Clock genes' in the suprachiasmatic nucleus
(SCN), which then entrains a similar set of Clock genes in peripheral tissues
such as the heart, brain, spleen, lung, liver, skeletal muscle and kidney. The
intrinsic time-keeping system influences activity, such as sleep, temperature
regulation, rates of metabolism, immune responses, blood pressure and hormone
secretion. The function and availability of mediators involved in the
inflammatory response, fibrinolytic and anti-coagulation pathways are all under
the tight control of the molecular Clock system. These include IL-6, PAI-1,
fibrinogen, fibroblasts and TNF-α. We hypothesise that disruptions in the 'Clock 
system' are central to the causal pathway of adhesion formation. Our hypothesis
takes into consideration and utilises current understanding in the field uniting 
individual principles. Moreover; this hypothesis suggests strategies for
optimising existing therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21146320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Psychosom Med. 2011 Feb-Mar;73(2):142-50. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3182020d08. Epub
2010 Nov 19.

Sleep variability, health-related practices, and inflammatory markers in a
community dwelling sample of older adults.

Okun ML(1), Reynolds CF 3rd, Buysse DJ, Monk TH, Mazumdar S, Begley A, Hall M.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Medicine Institute and Department of Psychiatry, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. okunml@upmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To explore relationships between wake- and sleep-related health
behaviors and circulating concentrations of inflammatory markers (interleukin
[IL]-6 and tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-α) in a cohort of community dwelling older
adults. Low-grade chronic inflammation is an important risk factor for
age-related morbidity. Health behaviors, including average aggregate measures of 
sleep, have been linked to increased inflammation in older adults. Variability in
sleep timing may also be associated with increased inflammation.
METHOD: Participants were community dwelling older adults ≥ 60 years (n = 222: 39
bereaved, 55 caregivers, 52 with insomnia, and 76 good sleepers). Mean values and
intraindividual variability in sleep, as well as caffeine and alcohol use,
exercise, and daytime napping, were assessed by sleep diaries. Blood samples were
obtained in the morning.
RESULTS: Several interactions were noted between sleep behaviors, inflammatory
markers, and participant group. Greater variability in wake time and time in bed 
was associated with higher IL-6 among good sleepers relative to caregivers and
older adults with insomnia. Good sleepers who consumed moderate amounts of
alcohol had the lowest concentrations of IL-6 compared with the other three
groups who consumed alcohol. Insomnia subjects, but not good sleepers, showed
increased concentrations of IL-6 associated with caffeine use. Caregivers showed 
increased concentrations of TNF-α with alcohol use relative to good sleepers.
Greater variability in bedtime, later wake times, and longer time in bed was
associated with higher TNF-α regardless of group.
CONCLUSIONS: Moderation and regularity in the practice of certain health
behaviors, including sleep practices, were associated with lower plasma levels of
inflammatory markers in older adults. Life circumstances and specific sleep
disorders may modify these associations.

PMCID: PMC3106426
PMID: 21097658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Psychosomatics. 2010 Nov-Dec;51(6):474-9. doi: 10.1176/appi.psy.51.6.474.

The role of inflammatory cytokines in cognition and other non-motor symptoms of
Parkinson's disease.

Menza M(1), Dobkin RD, Marin H, Mark MH, Gara M, Bienfait K, Dicke A, Kusnekov A.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatry & Neurology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, D207A, 671 Hoes
Lane, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. menza@umdnj.edu

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) affects patients' lives with more than just 
physical impairment. Many of the non-motor aspects of PD, such as cognitive
impairment, depression, and sleep disturbances, are common and are associated
with a variety of poor outcomes. However, at present, the pathophysiology and
clinical management of these symptoms are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: The authors sought to determine the associations between various
illness-associated cytokines, cortisol, and the non-motor symptoms of PD.
METHOD: The authors examined a panel of cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, TNF-α) and
cortisol in a cohort of 52 PD patients with depression.
RESULTS: There were a number of significant correlations between the non-motor
symptoms and TNF-α. Specifically, the authors found that TNF-α (but not IL-1β,
IL-6, IL-10, or cortisol) was significantly correlated with measures of
cognition, depression, and disability. In regression analyses accounting for all 
variables, TNF-α was consistently significant in explaining variance in
cognition, depression, sleep, and disability.
CONCLUSION: These data are consistent with a growing body of literature that
implicates inflammatory cytokines in neural and behavioral processes and further 
suggests that TNF-α may be involved in the production and/or maintenance of
non-motor symptoms in PD.

PMCID: PMC2987579
PMID: 21051678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Metabolism. 2011 Jul;60(7):982-6. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2010.09.008. Epub 2010
Oct 30.

Maternal short sleep duration is associated with increased levels of inflammatory
markers at 3 years postpartum.

Taveras EM(1), Rifas-Shiman SL, Rich-Edwards JW, Mantzoros CS.

Author information: 
(1)Obesity Prevention Program, Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. elsie_taveras@hphc.org

The purpose of this study was to examine the association of short sleep duration 
among women in the first year postpartum with inflammation at 3 years postpartum.
We studied 479 women in Project Viva, a prospective cohort. At 6 months and 1
year postpartum, women reported the number of hours they slept in a 24-hour
period, from which we calculated a weighted average of daily sleep. We used
multivariable median regression analyses to predict the independent effects of
short sleep duration (≤5 vs >5 h/d) on markers of inflammation, for example,
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and C-reactive protein at 3 years postpartum. Women's mean
(SD) hours of daily sleep in the first year postpartum was 6.7 (0.96) hours.
After adjusting for age, race/ethnicity, education, parity, pre-pregnancy body
mass index, excessive gestational weight gain, and gestational age at delivery,
we found that postpartum sleep ≤5 h/d was associated with elevated IL-6 (β, 0.25 
pg/mL; 95% confidence interval, 0.14-0.43) compared with >5 h/d. Although
postpartum sleep ≤5 h/d appeared to also be associated with elevated C-reactive
protein (β 0.15 mg/dL; 95% confidence interval, -0.08 to 0.52), these results did
not reach statistical significance. Short sleep duration in the first year
postpartum is associated with elevated levels of the proinflammatory marker,
IL-6, at 3 years postpartum.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3117066
PMID: 21040938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Sleep Med. 2010 Dec;11(10):1043-8. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.08.006. Epub 2010
Oct 18.

Prevalence of restless legs syndrome among adults in Iceland and Sweden: Lung
function, comorbidity, ferritin, biomarkers and quality of life.

Benediktsdottir B(1), Janson C, Lindberg E, Arnardóttir ES, Olafsson I, Cook E,
Thorarinsdottir EH, Gislason T.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Iceland.

OBJECTIVE: This study investigates the prevalence and the association between
restless legs syndrome (RLS) and a large variety of health variables in two
well-characterized random samples from the general population in Reykjavik,
Iceland, and Uppsala, Sweden.
METHODS: Using the national registries of inhabitants, a random sample from
adults aged 40 and over living in Reykjavík, Iceland (n=939), and Uppsala, Sweden
(n=998), were invited to participate in a study on the prevalence of COPD
(response rate 81.1% and 62.2%). In addition, the participants were asked to
answer the following questionnaires: International RLS Rating Scale, Short
Form-12, the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, and questions about sleep,
gastroeosophageal reflux, diabetes and hypertension, as well as pharmacological
treatment. Interleukin-6 (IL-6), C-reactive protein (CRP) and ferritin were
measured in serum.
RESULTS: RLS was more commonly reported in Reykjavik (18.3%) than in Uppsala
(11.5%). Icelandic women reported RLS almost twice as often as Swedish women
(24.4 vs. 13.9% p=0.001), but there was no difference in prevalence of RLS
between Icelandic and Swedish men. RLS was strongly associated with sleep
disturbances and excessive daytime sleepiness. Subjects with RLS were more likely
to be ex- and current smokers than subjects without RLS (p<0.001). Respiratory
symptoms and airway obstruction were more prevalent among those reporting RLS and
they also estimated their physical quality of life lower than those without RLS
(p<0.001). RLS was not associated with symptoms of the metabolic syndrome like
hypertension, obesity, markers of systemic inflammation (IL-6 and CRP) or
cardiovascular diseases. Ferritin levels were significantly lower in RLS
participants (p=0.0002), but not (p=0.07) after adjustment for center, age, sex
and smoking history.
CONCLUSION: Restless legs syndrome was twice as common among Icelandic women
compared to Swedish women. No such difference was seen for men. RLS was strongly 
associated with smoking and respiratory symptoms, decreased lung function, sleep 
disturbances, excessive daytime sleepiness, and physical aspects of life quality.
RLS was not associated with markers of the metabolic syndrome like hypertension, 
obesity, cardiovascular diseases or biomarkers of systemic inflammation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20961808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2010 Sep;136(9):896-9. doi:
10.1001/archoto.2010.142.

Plasma levels of MCP-1 and adiponectin in obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.

Kim J(1), Lee CH, Park CS, Kim BG, Kim SW, Cho JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, 
The Catholic University of Korea, Yeongdeungpo-gu, Seoul 150-713, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the correlation between concentrations of the
proinflammatory cytokines monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), adiponectin,
interleukin 6 (IL-6), interleukin 8 (IL-8), and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Repeated apnea attacks in 
patients with OSAS constitute a hypoxic condition, which induces tissue
inflammation by mediation of these proinflammatory cytokines.
DESIGN: Radioimmunoassay analyses of nonrandomized controlled trial.
SETTING: University-affiliated tertiary care hospital.
PATIENTS: The study population comprised 59 patients who underwent the
polysomnography.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Serum concentrations of MCP-1, adiponectin, IL-6, IL-8,
and TNF, as well as body mass index and polysomnographic data, including
apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) and lowest oxygen saturation.
RESULTS: The mean (SD) plasma level of MCP-1 in serum was increased in all
patients with OSAS (P < .001), while adiponectin level was decreased in the
patients with severe OSAS (6.88 [1.78] μg/mL) compared with normal controls (8.90
[2.63] μg/mL) (P = .006). Serum concentrations of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF did not
exhibit any differences between patients with OSAS and normal controls. The
correlation coefficient between plasma MCP-1 level and AHI was 0.62 and between
adiponectin level and AHI was 0.66.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that plasma MCP-1 and adiponectin levels were
different between patients with OSAS and normal controls. Adiponectin and MCP-1
may be prognostic factors for comparing patients with OSAS before and after
treatment.

PMID: 20855682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Eur Respir J. 2011 Jul;38(1):89-97. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00048610. Epub 2010 Sep
16.

Increased upper airway cytokines and oxidative stress in severe obstructive sleep
apnoea.

Kimoff RJ(1), Hamid Q, Divangahi M, Hussain S, Bao W, Naor N, Payne RJ,
Ariyarajah A, Mulrain K, Petrof BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Meakins-Christie Laboratories, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
john.kimoff@mcgill.ca

Inflammation may contribute to upper airway pathophysiology in obstructive sleep 
apnoea (OSA). Our objective was to compare upper airway pro-inflammatory cytokine
expression, oxidative stress and connective tissue deposition in severe (n = 25) 
versus mild (n = 17) OSA patients. Upper airway surgical specimens were separated
by predominance of either mucosal or muscle tissue. Expression levels of
interleukin (IL)-1α, IL-6, interferon-γ, RANTES (regulated on activation, normal 
T-cell expressed and secreted), transforming growth factor (TGF)-β and l-selectin
were measured by ribonuclease protection assay. Oxidative stress was assessed via
protein carbonyl group detection by immunoblotting. Histochemistry was employed
for immunolocalisation of selected cytokines and connective tissue morphometry.
In the severe OSA group, expression of IL-1α, IL-6 and TGF-β was significantly
higher in mucosa-predominant tissues, whereas in muscle-predominant specimens,
RANTES expression was greater in severe OSA. Increased protein carbonylation was 
observed in severe OSA within both mucosal and muscle compartments.
Immunohistochemistry localised TGF-β to submucosal and perimuscular inflammatory 
cells, while IL-6 was primarily localised to myocytes. Consistent with the
pro-fibrotic cytokine profile observed in mucosa-predominant tissue, morphometric
analysis revealed greater submucosal and perimuscular connective tissue in severe
OSA subjects. There is increased pro-inflammatory and pro-fibrotic cytokine
expression, oxidative stress, and connective tissue deposition in upper airway
tissues from severe versus mild OSA patients.

PMID: 20847078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Psychosom Med. 2010 Oct;72(8):755-62. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181f367e2. Epub
2010 Sep 14.

Overnight changes of immune parameters and catecholamines are associated with
mood and stress.

Rief W(1), Mills PJ, Ancoli-Israel S, Ziegler MG, Pung MA, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, San Diego,
California, USA. rief@staff.uni-marburg.de

OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that a nocturnal decrease of secretion of
inflammation markers and catecholamines would be associated with mood and stress 
variables even after controlling for objective sleep variables.
METHODS: A total of 130 healthy volunteers participated in this study, spending 2
nights in the Gillin Laboratory of Sleep and Chronobiology at the University of
California, San Diego, General Clinical Research Center. Blood samples were
obtained before sleep (10:30 PM) and after awakening (6:30 AM) on the first day, 
and these samples were assayed for inflammatory biomarkers and catecholamines. On
the second night, polysomnographic records were scored for objective sleep
variables, e.g., total sleep time and wake after sleep onset. Self-rating scales 
for mood, stress, depression, and daily hassles were administered the second day.
RESULTS: The nocturnal decrease in interleukin-6 was smaller in people who
reported more negative mood or fatigue and greater in those who reported more
uplift events (e.g., with Profile of Mood States fatigue r(p) = -.25 to -.30).
People with high stress or high depression levels had smaller nocturnal decreases
of epinephrine. That relationship was even stronger when partial correlations
were used to control for morning level and sleep variables. The associations
between nocturnal changes of C-reactive protein, soluble tumor necrosis
factor-receptor I, and norepinephrine with psychological states were
nonremarkable.
CONCLUSIONS: The analyses of nocturnal change scores (difference scores) add
substantial information compared with the traditional analyses of morning levels 
of immune variables and catecholamines alone. Subjective well-being is
significantly associated with a greater nocturnal decrease of interleukin-6 and
epinephrine. More research on nocturnal adaptation processes is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3162345
PMID: 20841563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Nov 5;484(3):201-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.08.054. Epub
2010 Aug 26.

Serum anti-inflammatory markers in general population subjects with elevated
depressive symptoms.

Lehto SM(1), Niskanen L, Miettola J, Tolmunen T, Viinamäki H, Mäntyselkä P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Kuopio University Hospital, 70210 Kuopio, Finland.
Soili.Lehto@kuh.fi

Anti-inflammatory substances have previously been suggested to show compensatory 
elevations in depressed individuals with pronounced inflammatory changes. In
order to further clarify these observations, we examined depression-related
alterations in the serum levels of anti-inflammatory markers interleukin (IL)-1
receptor antagonist (RA) and IL-10 and the pro-inflammatory marker IL-6 in 416
general population participants. Depression was evaluated with the Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI). Participants with elevated depressive symptoms
(BDI>14, n=44) had increased levels of IL-1 RA and IL-6. No changes were observed
in their IL-10 levels. In multivariate modeling with adjustments for age, gender,
obesity, regular smoking, alcohol use, metabolic syndrome, physical exercise,
sleep disturbance, and the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, a high
level of IL-1 RA was associated with an increased likelihood of belonging to the 
group with elevated depressive symptoms (OR for each 1 SD increase in the serum
level of IL-1 RA: 2.17, 95% CI 1.35-3.48, p=0.001). The significance of IL-6
alterations did not persist in the same model. The pronounced secretion of
anti-inflammatory marker IL-1 RA may reflect the presence of compensatory
mechanisms during a depression-related inflammatory state.

2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Affect Disord. 2011 May;130(3):378-84. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.07.015. Epub
2010 Aug 12.

Changes in sleep quality, but not hormones predict time to postpartum depression 
recurrence.

Okun ML(1), Luther J, Prather AA, Perel JM, Wisniewski S, Wisner KL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, USA.
okunml@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Poor sleep quality, dysregulation of hormones and increased
inflammatory cytokines are all associated with the risk for postpartum major
depression (PPMD). We evaluated change over time in sleep quality and hormones
during the first 17 weeks postpartum, as well as a single cytokine measure, and
their association with PPMD recurrence.
METHODS: Participants were pregnant women (N=56), with past histories of MDD/PPMD
but not depressed in their current pregnancy. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index 
(PSQI) and blood samples were collected 8 times during the first 17 weeks
postpartum. Estradiol, prolactin and cortisol, and a single measure of IL-6 were 
assayed. Recurrence was determined by two consecutive 21-item Hamilton Rating
Scale for Depression (HRSD) scores≥15 and clinician interview.
RESULTS: In the analyses of time to PPMD recurrence, poor sleep quality, but none
of the hormones, was associated with PPMD recurrence (p<.05) after controlling
for medication assignment. With every one point increase in PSQI scores across
time, a woman's risk for recurrence increased by approximately 25% There was no
significant association between PSQI scores and IL-6 concentrations in early
postpartum (χ(2)=0.98, p=.32).
CONCLUSIONS: Poor sleep quality across the first 17 weeks post-delivery increases
the risk for recurrent PPMD among women with a history of MDD. Changes in the
hormonal milieu were not associated with recurrence. Further exploration of the
degree to which poor sleep contributes to hormonal and cytokine dysregulation and
how they are involved in the pathophysiology of PPMD is warranted.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3006083
PMID: 20708275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Integr Cancer Ther. 2010 Sep;9(3):270-5. doi: 10.1177/1534735410370036. Epub 2010
May 11.

Association of IL-6, hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis function, and depression
in patients with cancer.

Jehn CF(1), Kühnhardt D, Bartholomae A, Pfeiffer S, Schmid P, Possinger K, Flath 
BC, Lüftner D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Charité, Berlin,
Germany. christian.jehn@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Evidence suggests that cytokines (IL-6) and alteration of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis play a crucial role in the etiology of 
depression. Patients with cancer show elevated prevalence rates for depression.
The objective of this cross-sectional study was to investigate the associations
between these abnormalities and depression.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of IL-6 and cortisol were measured in cancer
patients with (N = 31) and without depression (N = 83). The relative diurnal
variation of cortisol (cortisol VAR), expressed in percentage, was calculated.
RESULTS: There was a significant difference in median plasma concentration of
IL-6 between the patients with depression and those without (18.7 vs 2.7 pg/mL; P
< .001). Relative cortisol VAR was decreased in depressed patients as compared
with patients without depression (11.72% vs 60.6%, P = .037). A positive
correlation between the depressive symptoms and IL-6 concentration was found (r =
0.469, P < .001). Negative correlations were found between cortisol VAR versus
depressive symptoms and cortisol VAR versus IL-6 (r = -0.6, P < .001 and r =
-0.52, P < .001, respectively). IL-6 (odds ratio [OR] = 1.1; 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 1.0-1.2; P = .006) and cortisol VAR (OR = 1.3; 95%CI = 1.0-1.4; P
= .02) are independently associated with depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression in cancer is associated with increased plasma IL-6
concentrations and dysfunction of the HPA axis.

PMID: 20702499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Lung. 2010 Dec;188(6):469-74. doi: 10.1007/s00408-010-9253-4. Epub 2010 Jul 29.

Quantification of circulating cell-free DNA in the serum of patients with
obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome.

Ye L(1), Ma GH, Chen L, Li M, Liu JL, Yang K, Li QY, Li N, Wan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, No.197, Ruijin Second Road, Shanghai 200025,
China.

Serum cell-free DNA concentrations have been reported to increase in many acute
diseases as well as in some chronic conditions such as cancer and autoimmune
diseases. The aim of this study was to examine whether serum DNA concentrations
were elevated in patients with obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).
The effects of nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) on serum DNA
were also investigated. One hundred twenty-seven people diagnosed with OSAHS by
polysomnography (PSG) were admitted into the OSAHS group, and 52 subjects without
OSAHS were recruited for the control group. The OSAHS group was further divided
into mild, moderate, and severe OSAHS subgroups based on their apnea-hypopnea
index (AHI) during sleep. Ten patients with moderate and severe OSAHS were
treated with nCPAP. Serum DNA, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and malonaldehyde (MDA)
concentrations were measured and were found to be significantly higher in
patients with moderate and severe OSAHS groups than those in the mild OSAHS and
control groups (p < 0.05). Univariate analysis showed that serum DNA correlated
positively with AHI, oxygen desaturation index (ODI), IL-6, and MDA, and
negatively correlated with minimal oxygen saturation (miniSaO(2)) (all p < 0.05).
In stepwise multiple regression analysis, only MDA and miniSaO(2) were suggested 
as significant independent predictors for the serum DNA concentrations. After 6
months of nCPAP therapy, serum concentrations of DNA, IL-6, and MDA were
significantly decreased (p < 0.05). The increasing concentration of serum DNA in 
patients with OSAHS was positively correlated with disease severity. Serum DNA
may become an important parameter for monitoring the severity of OSAHS and
effectiveness of therapy.

PMID: 20668869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Brain Behav Immun. 2011 Jan;25(1):53-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2010.07.245. Epub 2010
Jul 23.

Sleep depth and fatigue: role of cellular inflammatory activation.

Thomas KS(1), Motivala S, Olmstead R, Irwin MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Pitzer College, 1050N. College Avenue, Claremont, CA
91711, USA. kamala_thomas@pitzer.edu

Individuals with underlying inflammation present with a high prevalence of
non-specific co-morbid symptoms including sleep disturbance and fatigue. However,
the association between cellular expression of proinflammatory cytokines,
alterations of sleep depth and daytime fatigue has not been concurrently
examined. In healthy adults (24-61 years old), evening levels of monocyte
intracellular proinflammatory cytokine production were assessed prior to
evaluation of polysomnographic sleep and measures of fatigue the following day.
Stimulated monocyte production of interleukin-6 (IL-6), but not tumor necrosis
factor α (TNF-α), was negatively associated with slow wave sleep (ΔR²=.17,
p=.029). In contrast, stimulated monocyte production of IL-6 was positively
associated with rapid-eye movement (REM) sleep duration during the first sleep
cycle (ΔR²=.26, p<.01). Moreover, evening stimulated production of IL-6 was
associated with fatigue the following day (ΔR²=.17, p=.05). Mediation analyses
showed that slow wave sleep, but not REM sleep duration, mediated the
relationship between evening levels of IL-6 production and daytime fatigue. These
results indicate that increases in stimulated monocyte production of IL-6 may be 
associated with decreases in slow wave sleep and increases in REM sleep duration.
Relative loss of slow wave sleep may be one pathway through which cellular
inflammation leads to daytime fatigue.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC2991567
PMID: 20656013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Acta Otolaryngol. 2010 Dec;130(12):1394-8. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2010.495134.
Epub 2010 Jul 16.

Short-term effect of multilevel surgery on adipokines and pro-inflammatory
cytokines in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.

Eun YG(1), Kim MG, Kwon KH, Shin SY, Cho JS, Kim SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Masan Samsung Hospital,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Masan, Korea.

CONCLUSION: This study shows the possibility that multilevel surgery for
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is helpful to improve the levels of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and adipokines, which are related to complications of 
OSA.
OBJECTIVES: The effects of multilevel surgery on adipokines and pro-inflammatory 
cytokines in patients with OSA were assessed.
METHODS: Fifty-one patients with OSA underwent uvulopalatopharyngoplasty and
radiofrequency tongue base reduction. Body mass index (BMI), Epworth sleepiness
scale (ESS) and subjective symptoms using visual analog scales were assessed at
baseline and 4 weeks after treatment. Adiponectin, leptin, interleukin (IL)-6,
and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α were measured with a LINCOplex Human
Immunoassay at baseline and 4 weeks after surgical treatment.
RESULTS: Significant improvements in subjective symptoms and ESS were found at 4 
weeks after multilevel surgery. No significant change in BMI was observed.
Adiponectin level was significantly increased after surgical treatment.
Postoperative leptin, IL-6, and TNF-α levels were significantly decreased. The
percent changes of adiponectin, leptin, IL-6, and TNF-α after multilevel surgery 
were not significantly different among patients with mild, moderate, and severe
OSA.

PMID: 20632906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Mediators Inflamm. 2010;2010:675320. doi: 10.1155/2010/675320. Epub 2010 Jun 8.

Inflammatory markers in middle-aged obese subjects: does obstructive sleep apnea 
syndrome play a role?

Steiropoulos P(1), Papanas N, Nena E, Antoniadou M, Serasli E, Papoti S,
Hatzizisi O, Kyriazis G, Tzouvelekis A, Maltezos E, Tsara V, Bouros D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Medical School, Democritus University of Thrace,
Alexandroupolis, Greece. pstirop@med.duth.gr

BACKGROUND: Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome (OSAS) is associated with
inflammation, but obesity may be a confounding factor. Thus, the aim of this
study was to explore differences in serum levels of inflammation markers between 
obese individuals with or without OSAS.
METHODS: Healthy individuals (n = 61) from an outpatient obesity clinic were
examined by polysomnography and blood analysis, for measurement of TNF-alpha,
IL-6, CRP, and fibrinogen levels. According to Apnea-Hypopnea Index (AHI),
participants were divided into two BMI-matched groups: controls (AHI < 15/h, n = 
23) and OSAS patients (AHI > or = 15/h, n = 38).
RESULTS: OSAS patients had significantly higher TNF-alpha levels (P < .001) while
no other difference in the examined inflammation markers was recorded between
groups. Overall, TNF-alpha levels were correlated with neck circumference (P <
.001), AHI (P = .002), and Oxygen Desaturation Index (P = .002).
CONCLUSIONS: Obese OSAS patients have elevated TNF-alpha levels compared to
BMI-matched controls, suggesting a role of OSAS in promoting inflammation,
possibly mediated by TNF-a.

PMCID: PMC2902040
PMID: 20628509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Eur Respir J. 2011 Mar;37(3):587-94. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00036910. Epub 2010
Jul 1.

Nasal inflammation in sleep apnoea patients using CPAP and effect of heated
humidification.

Koutsourelakis I(1), Vagiakis E, Perraki E, Karatza M, Magkou C, Kopaka M,
Roussos C, Zakynthinos S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Athens University, Center of Sleep Disorders, Evangelismos
Hospital, 45-47 Ipsilandou Str, GR 106 75, Athens, Greece.
ykoutsourelakis@yahoo.gr

Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) can cause undesirable nasal
symptoms, such as congestion to obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) patients, whose
symptoms can be attenuated by the addition of heated humidification. However,
neither the nature of nasal symptoms nor the effect of heated humidification on
nasal pathophysiology and pathology are convincingly known. 20 patients with OSA 
on nasal CPAP who exhibited symptomatic nasal obstruction were randomised to
receive either 3 weeks of CPAP treatment with heated humidification or 3 weeks of
CPAP treatment with sham-heated humidification, followed by 3 weeks of the
opposite treatment, respectively. Nasal symptom score, nasal resistance, nasal
lavage interleukin-6, interleukin-12 and tumour necrosis factor-α and nasal
mucosa histopathology were assessed at baseline and after each treatment arm.
Heated humidification in comparison with sham-heated humidification was
associated with decrease in nasal symptomatology, resistance and lavage
cytokines, and attenuation of inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis of the 
nasal mucosa. In conclusion, nasal obstruction of OSA patients on CPAP treatment 
is inflammatory in origin and the addition of heated humidification decreases
nasal resistance and mucosal inflammation.

PMID: 20595158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2010 Jul;37(4):476-83. doi: 10.1188/10.ONF.476-483.

Pilot study of cranial stimulation for symptom management in breast cancer.

Lyon DE(1), Schubert C, Taylor AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA.
delyon@vcu.edu

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To examine the feasibility, relationships among variables,
and preliminary outcomes of a self-directed complementary modality, cranial
electrical stimulation (CES), for symptom management in women receiving
chemotherapy for breast cancer.
DESIGN: Biobehavioral pilot feasibility study.
SETTING: Two university-based cancer centers.
SAMPLE: 36 women with stage I-IIIA breast cancer scheduled to receive
chemotherapy.
METHODS: Data were collected via interview, questionnaires, and interactive voice
technology (IVR). Biomarkers were measured from a blood sample taken prior to the
initial chemotherapy.
MAIN RESEARCH VARIABLES: Symptoms of depression, anxiety, fatigue, pain, and
sleep disturbances; biomarkers (proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-6, tumor
necrosis factor alpha [TNF-alpha], interleukin-1 beta) and C-reactive protein
[CRP]); and CES.
FINDINGS: CES appears to be a safe and acceptable modality during chemotherapy.
Recruitment and retention were adequate. IVR was associated with missing data.
Symptoms of depression, anxiety, fatigue, and sleep disturbances were highly
correlated with each other, and most symptoms were correlated with CRP at
baseline. Depression and TNF-alpha had a positive, significant relationship.
Levels of depression increased over time and trended toward less increase in the 
CES group; however, the differences among groups were not statistically
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: The data support the feasibility of CES. Further testing in larger
samples is needed to examine the efficacy of CES for symptom management of
multiple, concurrent symptoms and to further develop the biobehavioral framework.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Interventions that are effective at minimizing more
than one target symptom are especially needed to provide optimal symptom
management for women with breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3061342
PMID: 20591807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2010 Jun;30(6):1366-8.

[Correlation between sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome and preeclampsia and the
possible pathogenesis of preeclampsia].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye H(1), Li TP, Wang P, Xu Z, Chen DJ, Liu HS, Gao CH, Liu AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sleep Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou 510515, China. yehong20078328@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the relationship between sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome 
(SAHS) and preeclampsia and the possible pathogenesis of the latter.
METHODS: Twenty-five healthy pregnant women, 43 pregnant women with preeclampsia,
and 27 with preeclampsia complicated by SAHS were enrolled in this study.
Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) and the lowest arterial oxygen saturation (LSaO2) were
measured through a 7-hour polysomnography (PSG), and the maternal age,
gestational age, body mass index and 24-hour urine protein were recorded.
RESULTS: All the indexes except for the maternal age and gestational age showed
significant differences between the 3 groups. The two groups of preeclampsia
patients showed a significant difference in BMI from the control cases.
Significant positive correlations of AHI to BMI, MAP and 24-hour urine protein
were noted; LSaO2 was found to inversely correlate to BMI, MAP, and 24-hour urine
protein. In spite of the significant correlation of BMI to the other indexes, we 
found that BMI was less important than AHI and LSaO2.
CONCLUSION: SAHS may induce or aggravate preeclampsia. Greater attention should
be given to the presence of SAHS in pregnant women with obesity, but obesity is
not the predominant predisposing factor for preeclampsia.

PMID: 20584678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Clin Sleep Med. 2010 Jun 15;6(3):251-5.

Endothelial function in patients with post-CPAP residual sleepiness.

El-Solh AA(1), Akinnusi ME, Moitheennazima B, Ayyar L, Relia S.

Author information: 
(1)The Veterans Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, NY
14215-1199, USA. solh@buffalo.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVES: The significance of residual excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS)
on cardiovascular markers in patients with adequately treated obstructive sleep
apnea (OSA) remains unclear. The objective of this study was to investigate
flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) and inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein
[CRP], tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alpha, and interleukin [IL]-6) in continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP)-compliant patients with residual EDS compared
with CPAP-compliant patients without residual EDS.
METHODS: FMD of the brachial artery was measured by ultrasound in 12
CPAP-compliant patients with OSA who had residual EDS and 12 age-, sex-, and body
mass index-matched CPAP-compliant patients with OSA who did not have residual EDS
on week 8 after initiation of CPAP. Twelve otherwise-healthy subjects without
sleep disordered breathing were used as control subjects. Serum concentrations of
CRP, TNF-alpha, and IL-6 were quantified by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays.
RESULTS: Baseline FMD was comparable among CPAP-compliant patients with residual 
EDS (7.2 +/- 2.3), CPAP-compliant patients without residual EDS (8.6 +/- 2.1),
and control subjects (7.7 +/- 1.4) (p = 0.37). The concentrations of CRP,
TNF-alpha, and IL-6 were also not significantly different between subjects with
CPAP-compliant residual EDS and those without residual EDS (p = 0.44, p = 0.37,
and p = 0.42; respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Residual EDS in patients with adequately treated OSA may not
represent a risk factor for cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC2883036
PMID: 20572418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2010 Oct;40(4):531-44. doi:
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2009.12.006. Epub 2010 Jun 8.

Preliminary evidence of an association between a functional interleukin-6
polymorphism and fatigue and sleep disturbance in oncology patients and their
family caregivers.

Miaskowski C(1), Dodd M, Lee K, West C, Paul SM, Cooper BA, Wara W, Swift PS,
Dunn LB, Aouizerat BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Nursing, School of Nursing, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143-0610, USA. chris.miaskowski@nursing.ucsf.edu

CONTEXT: Fatigue and sleep disturbance are common problems in oncology patients
and their family caregivers (FCs). However, little is known about factors that
contribute to interindividual variability in these symptoms or to their
underlying biologic mechanisms.
OBJECTIVES: An evaluation was done on whether genetic variation in a prominent
proinflammatory cytokine, interleukin-6 (IL-6 c.-6101A>T [rs4719714]), was
associated with mean ratings of evening fatigue, morning fatigue, and sleep
disturbance, as well as with the trajectories of these symptoms.
METHODS: Over six months, participants completed standardized measures of fatigue
and sleep disturbance. Linear regression was used to assess the effect of the
IL-6 genotype and other covariates on mean fatigue and sleep disturbance scores. 
Hierarchical linear modeling was used to determine the effect of the IL-6
genotype on symptom trajectories.
RESULTS: Common allele homozygotes reported higher levels of evening fatigue
(P=0.003), morning fatigue (P=0.09), and sleep disturbance (P=0.003) than minor
allele carriers. Predictors of baseline level and trajectories of evening fatigue
included age, gender, and genotype (intercepts) and baseline level of evening
fatigue (slope). Predictors of baseline level and trajectories of morning fatigue
included age and genotype (intercept) and age and baseline level of morning
fatigue (slope). Predictors of baseline level and trajectories of sleep
disturbance included age and genotype (intercept) and baseline level of sleep
disturbance (slope).
CONCLUSIONS: Findings provide preliminary evidence of a genetic association
between a functional promoter polymorphism in the IL-6 gene and severity of
evening fatigue, morning fatigue, and sleep disturbance in oncology patients and 
their FCs.

Copyright © 2010 U.S. Cancer Pain Relief Committee. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2952712
PMID: 20570482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Laryngoscope. 2010 Jul;120(7):1481-8. doi: 10.1002/lary.20946.

Changes in obstructive sleep apnea severity, biomarkers, and quality of life
after multilevel surgery.

Kezirian EJ(1), Malhotra A, Goldberg AN, White DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, California, USA. ekezirian@ohns.ucsf.edu

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate the impact of multilevel obstructive sleep
apnea surgical treatment on sleep-disordered breathing severity, health-related
measures, and quality of life, and to examine the association between changes in 
sleep-disordered breathing severity and these other outcomes.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
METHODS: Subjects with obstructive sleep apnea unable to tolerate positive airway
pressure therapy and with evidence of multilevel (palate and hypopharynx)
obstruction underwent uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, tonsillectomy, and genioglossus 
advancement, with or without hyoid suspension. All subjects had preoperative and 
postoperative study assessments, including blood draw for C-reactive protein,
interleukin-6, homocysteine, homeostasis model of insulin resistance, and leptin,
and evaluation with the Functional Outcomes of Sleep Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Thirty subjects underwent multilevel surgical treatment. The mean
apnea-hypopnea index decreased from 44.9 +/- 28.1 to 27.8 +/- 26.4 events/hour (P
= .008). Thirteen (43%) subjects in this heterogeneous sample achieved a response
to surgery (defined as an apnea-hypopnea index reduction of >or=50% to an
absolute level <15 events/hour), and body mass index <or=32 kg/m(2) was
associated with a higher likelihood (55%, 12/22) of response (P = .04). There was
no overall change in C-reactive protein levels, but responders demonstrated a
decrease (-1.02 +/- 0.98 mg/L, P = .003) that was independent of changes in body 
weight. There were no significant changes in other health-related measures.
Responders and nonresponders both demonstrated improvements in sleep-related
quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: This multilevel surgery was associated with a low likelihood of
response in subjects with body mass index >32 kg/m(2). Responders had decreased
C-reactive protein levels that were independent of changes in body weight.

PMID: 20564750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jul;69(7):1275-80. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.126888. Epub 2010
Jun 11.

Targeting pathophysiological rhythms: prednisone chronotherapy shows sustained
efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis.

Buttgereit F(1), Doering G, Schaeffler A, Witte S, Sierakowski S, Gromnica-Ihle
E, Jeka S, Krueger K, Szechinski J, Alten R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité University
Medicine Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
frank.buttgereit@charite.de

Comment in
    Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Jul;69(7):1257-9.

OBJECTIVE: This 9-month open-label extension of the Circadian Administration of
Prednisone in Rheumatoid Arthritis Study (CAPRA 1) investigated the long-term
safety and efficacy of prednisone chronotherapy with a novel modified-release
(MR) prednisone for up to 12 months.
METHODS: Of 288 patients with rheumatoid arthritis originally randomised to MR or
immediate-release (IR) prednisone, 249 continued with prednisone chronotherapy
(2-10 mg/day) in the 9-month open-label extension. Duration of morning stiffness 
of the joints (MS), disease activity scores (DAS28), American College of
Rheumatology (ACR20) responses and plasma levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6) were
assessed. Safety was analysed from adverse event reports and laboratory
investigations.
RESULTS: During the 3-month double-blind phase, patients in the MR group achieved
a reduction in MS of 33.1% while no change was observed in the IR group. After 6 
months of treatment, MS was reduced in the IR/MR group by 54% and in the MR/MR
group by 56%. MS reduction after 12 months was 45% (IR/MR group) and 55% (MR/MR
group). Plasma levels of IL-6 declined on MR treatment. DAS28 was reduced from
5.8 to 4.8 (MR/MR group) and 4.9 (IR/MR group), respectively. 37% of the 219
patients who completed the 12-month study achieved improvement according to the
ACR20 criteria. Adverse events did not differ from the known profile of low-dose 
prednisone.
CONCLUSIONS: Prednisone chronotherapy with the MR tablet was safe and well
tolerated and provided a sustained improvement which resulted in a better benefit
to risk ratio of low-dose glucocorticoid treatment for at least 12 months.

PMCID: PMC2946119
PMID: 20542963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2010 Aug;64(8):818-25. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2010.68. Epub 2010 Jun 
9.

Assessment of dietary fat intake and innate immune activation as risk factors for
impaired lung function.

Wood LG(1), Attia J, McElduff P, McEvoy M, Gibson PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Sleep Medicine, Hunter Medical Research
Institute, John Hunter Hospital, NSW, Australia. lisa.wood@newcastle.edu.au

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: Preservation of lung health with aging is an important
health issue in the general population, as loss of lung function with aging can
lead to the development of obstructive lung disease and is a predictor of
all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. Inflammation is increasingly linked to
loss of lung function and evidence suggests that consumption of dietary fat
exacerbates inflammation. We aimed to determine the association between dietary
fat intake and lung function in older people.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: Participants from the Hunter community study, a
population-based cohort, were recruited during 2004 and 2005. Participants
received a clinical assessment, including spirometry, and provided a blood
sample. Diets were analyzed using food-frequency questionnaires. Plasma
interleukin (IL)-6 and C-reactive protein was measured by Enzyme-Linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: Using backward stepwise linear regression, %energy from dietary fat, age
and plasma IL-6 were considered as negative predictors of forced expiratory
volume in one second (FEV(1)) in men. Also in men, % energy intake from dietary
fat, age, body mass index and IL-6 were negative predictors of %predicted forced 
vital capacity (FVC). Smoking and age were negative predictors of FEV(1)/FVC. In 
women, plasma IL-6 and age were negative predictors of %FVC, whereas obesity was 
positively associated with FEV(1)/FVC.
CONCLUSIONS: An increased proportion of fat in the diet is associated with the
reduced lung function in older men. Dietary-fat induced innate immune activation 
and IL-6 release may contribute to this effect. Dietary interventions involving
fat restriction should be further investigated as means of preserving lung
function with aging.

PMID: 20531437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Aug;95(8):3657-63. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2720. Epub 
2010 May 12.

Biological and diurnal variation in glucocorticoid sensitivity detected with a
sensitive in vitro dexamethasone suppression of cytokine production assay.

Cardinal J(1), Pretorius CJ, Ungerer JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Pathology Queensland, Brisbane 4029,
Queensland, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Glucocorticoid resistance due to mutations of the glucocorticoid
receptor (NR3C1) are rare, but reduced glucocorticoid sensitivity may play a role
in steroid-resistant asthma, inflammatory bowel disease, and septic shock. A
rapid and sensitive functional assay to detect glucocorticoid resistance will be 
advantageous.
METHOD: We describe a rapid in vitro monocyte dexamethasone suppression of
cytokine production (DSCP) assay with a 3-h incubation. The DSCP assay was
compared with the reference stimulated lymphocyte proliferation method. We
characterized the effect of delayed processing, time of sampling, and biological 
variation on the DSCP assay.
RESULTS: The DSCP assay clearly distinguished subjects with a known heterozygous 
mutation of the NR3C1 gene from control subjects, whereas the reference method
failed. Decreased glucocorticoid sensitivity was demonstrated in samples
collected in the afternoon. Intra-individual variation from samples collected in 
the morning was 13.0 and 12.7% for the IL-6 and TNF-alpha responses with the
respective inter-individual variations of 9.7 and 7.9%.
CONCLUSION: The DSCP assay was superior to the reference method and was
sufficiently sensitive to detect diurnal variation in control subjects. The
biological variation data supported the use of a population-based reference
interval. The assay is suitable for screening of glucocorticoid resistance
phenotypes and may provide insight into cortisol metabolism in critically ill
patients, asthmatics, and patients with inflammatory bowel disease provided that 
the variation due to delayed processing and time of collection are considered.

PMID: 20463096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jul;95(7):3392-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2492. Epub
2010 May 5.

Prader-Willi syndrome is associated with activation of the innate immune system
independently of central adiposity and insulin resistance.

Viardot A(1), Sze L, Purtell L, Sainsbury A, Loughnan G, Smith E, Herzog H,
Steinbeck K, Campbell LV.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research,
384 Victoria Street, Sydney-Darlinghurst NSW 2010, Australia.
a.viardot@garvan.org.au

BACKGROUND: Subjects with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) have a reduced life
expectancy due to cardiovascular disease. Increased systemic low-grade
inflammation is postulated as a contributor, despite reported lower visceral fat 
mass and increased insulin sensitivity.
OBJECTIVES: Our aim was to compare inflammatory markers and arterial stiffness in
PWS and adiposity-matched obese control subjects.
DESIGN: We conducted a cross-sectional cohort study comparing 12 PWS subjects, 12
obese subjects matched for percentage body fat and central abdominal fat mass,
and 10 healthy normal-weight subjects.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry was used to assess body
composition, flow cytometry to quantify activation markers on immun e cells, and 
ELISA for measurement of C-reactive protein, adiponectin, and IL-6. Insulin
resistance was estimated by homeostasis model assessment and arterial stiffness
by applanation tonometry.
RESULTS: PWS and obese subjects had similarly increased homeostasis model
assessment and arterial stiffness. Nevertheless, PWS subjects showed
significantly higher IL-6 (4.9 + or - 1.0 vs. 2.5 + or - 0.4 pg/ml; P = 0.02) and
nonsignificantly higher C-reactive protein (10.5 + or - 3.2 vs. 4.0 + or - 1.0
ng/ml; P = 0.08). Neutrophil activation markers CD66b and CD11b were higher in
PWS compared to obese subjects (P < 0.01), reflecting an activated innate immune 
system. These markers were positively related to central adiposity in lean and
obese subjects (r = 0.49; P < 0.05), but not in PWS subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: PWS subjects compared to adiposity-matched obese subjects
demonstrate similar insulin resistance but increased low-grade inflammation. The 
dissociation of inflammation and central adiposity suggests that activation of
innate immunity may be either a specific genetic feature of PWS or linked to the 
commonly associated obstructive sleep apnea syndrome, and might offer a treatment
target to reduce cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 20444923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Apr;1193:127-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.05289.x.

Effect of novel therapeutic glucocorticoids on circadian rhythms of hormones and 
cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis.

Kirwan JR(1), Clarke L, Hunt LP, Perry MG, Straub RH, Jessop DS.

Author information: 
(1)University of Bristol Academic Rheumatology Unit, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Bristol, UK. John.Kirwan@Bristol.ac.uk

The morning stiffness and pain of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is accompanied by a
rise in serum interleukin-6 (IL-6) from 2 am to 7 am. Using a formulation that
releases prednisone at 2 am (after ingestion at 10 pm), we studied the circadian 
dynamics of serum IL-6, other cytokines, and cortisol in 9 patients before and
after 2 weeks, therapy. Significant improvements occurred in morning stiffness,
pain, disease activity, and the acute-phase response. Only IL-6 showed measurable
cytokine circadian variation, its high pretreatment peak was abolished, and
changes in IL-6 correlated with the changes in morning stiffness. Following
treatment, afternoon and evening serum cortisol was reduced, but in the early
morning cortisol peak concentration increased. Thus the severity of morning
symptoms is related to nocturnal serum IL-6 concentration. The specific timing of
the medication, linked to the interaction between IL-6 and the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, may correct a postulated deficiency in
HPA control in RA.

PMID: 20398018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Brain Behav Immun. 2010 Aug;24(6):968-74. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2010.03.009. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

Inflammatory cytokines are associated with the development of symptom burden in
patients with NSCLC undergoing concurrent chemoradiation therapy.

Wang XS(1), Shi Q, Williams LA, Mao L, Cleeland CS, Komaki RR, Mobley GM, Liao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas M D Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. xswang@mdanderson.org

Elevations in cancer treatment-induced circulating inflammatory cytokines may be 
partially responsible for the development of significant symptom burden (e.g.,
pain, fatigue, distress, disturbed sleep) during concurrent chemoradiation
therapy (CXRT). Sixty-two patients undergoing CXRT for locally advanced non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) reported symptoms weekly for 15 weeks via the M. D.
Anderson Symptom Inventory (MDASI). Serum inflammatory cytokines were assessed
weekly during therapy via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Dynamic changes in
cytokines and associated symptom profiles were estimated using mixed-effect
models. MDASI symptom severity increased gradually as CXRT dose accumulated and
peaked at week 8. Serum concentrations of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, and serum
soluble receptor 1 for tumor necrosis factor (sTNF-R1) increased significantly by
week 8 (all p<.05). During CXRT, controlled for age, sex, race, body mass index, 
cancer recurrence, previous treatment status, total radiotherapy dose, and CXRT
delivery technique, an increase in sTNF-R1 was significantly related to an
increase in the mean score for all 15 MDASI symptoms (estimate, 1.74; SE, 0.69;
p<.05) and to a larger radiation dose to normal lung volume (estimate, 1.77; SE, 
0.71; p<.01); an increase in serum IL-6 was significantly related to increased
mean severity for the five most severe symptoms (pain, fatigue, disturbed sleep, 
lack of appetite, sore throat) (estimate, 0.32; SE, 0.16; p<.05). These results
suggest a role for over-expressed pro-inflammatory cytokines in significant
worsening of symptoms in NSCLC patients undergoing CXRT, and warrant further
study to identify biological targets for ameliorating treatment-related symptom
burden.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2897921
PMID: 20353817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2010 Feb;22(1):1-7.

Obstructive sleep apnea, metabolic syndrome, and age: will geriatricians be
caught asleep on the job?

Cherniack EP(1), Cherniack NS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics and Gerontology, The Geriatrics Institute, University
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Florida, USA. evan.cherniack@va.gov

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is increasingly recognized in older persons as an
important cause of morbidity and mortality, resulting in cardiovascular disease, 
cognitive dysfunction, and disturbed sleep. It has been cited as an independent
risk factor for the metabolic syndrome (MS). The elevated levels of cytokines,
such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, which also increase with
age, are a common feature of both OSA and MS. Intermittent hypoxia caused by the 
recurring episodes of apnea and near-apnea in OSA is a major cause of its
systemic effects. Mathematical models of OSA show how obesity and anatomic
changes in the upper airways, which may be age-related, interact with the
networks responsible for the chemical and neural control of breathing to cause
the recurrent intermittent hypoxia of sleep apnea. Treatment of OSA with
continuous positive airway pressure improves some aspects of the metabolic
syndrome, reduces cardiovascular morbidity, and improves domains of cognitive
function. OSA is more difficult to identify in the elderly because many of its
symptoms can be caused by other disorders which are common in the elderly.
Clinicians who encounter OSA may be advised to search for the presence of MS, and
vice versa.

PMID: 20305362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Physiol Genomics. 2010 May;41(3):306-14. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00091.2009.
Epub 2010 Mar 2.

Intermittent and sustained hypoxia induce a similar gene expression profile in
human aortic endothelial cells.

Polotsky VY(1), Savransky V, Bevans-Fonti S, Reinke C, Li J, Grigoryev DN,
Shimoda LA.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and.

Obstructive sleep apnea may cause vascular inflammation and atherosclerosis,
which has been attributed to intermittent hypoxia (IH). Recent data suggest that 
IH, but not sustained hypoxia (SH), activates proinflammatory genes in HeLa
cells. Effects of IH and SH on the gene expression profile in human aortic
endothelial cells (HAEC) have not been compared. We perfused media with
alternating flow of 16% and 0% O2 (IH) or constant flow of 4% O2 (SH-4%), 8% O2
(SH-8%), or 16% O2 (control) for 8 h. Illumina gene microarrays were performed,
with subsequent verification by real-time PCR. Proinflammatory cytokines in the
media were measured by ELISA. Both IH and SH-4% upregulated proinflammatory
genes, including heat shock protein 90-kDa B1, tumor necrosis factor superfamily 
member 4, and thrombospondin 1. Among all proinflammatory genes, only IL-8 mRNA
showed significantly higher levels of expression (1.78-fold) during IH, compared 
with SH-4%, but both types of hypoxic exposure elicited striking three- to
eightfold increases in IL-8 and IL-6 protein levels in the media. IH and SH-4%
also upregulated antioxidant genes, including heme oxygenase-1 and nuclear factor
(erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 (NRF2), whereas classical genes regulated by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1), such as endothelin and glucose transporter
GLUT1, were not induced. SH-8% induced changes in gene expression and cytokine
secretion that were similar to those of IH and SH-4%. In conclusion, short
exposures to IH and SH upregulate proinflammatory and antioxidant genes in HAEC
and increase secretion of proinflammatory cytokines IL-8 and IL-6 into media in
similar fashions.

PMCID: PMC2869105
PMID: 20197421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2009 Dec;19(6):583-97.

Effects of exercise on hepcidin response and iron metabolism during recovery.

Peeling P(1), Dawson B, Goodman C, Landers G, Wiegerinck ET, Swinkels DW, Trinder
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport Science, Exercise and Health, The University of Western
Australia, Crawley, Western Australia.

Urinary hepcidin, inflammation, and iron metabolism were examined during the 24
hr after exercise. Eight moderately trained athletes (6 men, 2 women) completed a
60-min running trial (15-min warm-up at 75-80% HR(peak) + 45 min at 85-90%
HR(peak)) and a 60-min trial of seated rest in a randomized, crossover design.
Venous blood and urine samples were collected pretrial, immediately posttrial,
and at 3, 6, and 24 hr posttrial. Samples were analyzed for interleukin-6 (IL-6),
C-reactive protein (CRP), serum iron, serum ferritin, and urinary hepcidin. The
immediate postrun levels of IL-6 and 24-hr postrun levels of CRP were
significantly increased from baseline (6.9 and 2.6 times greater, respectively)
and when compared with the rest trial (p < or = .05). Hepcidin levels in the run 
trial after 3, 6, and 24 hr of recovery were significantly greater (1.7-3.1
times) than the pre- and immediate postrun levels (p < or = .05). This outcome
was consistent in all participants, despite marked variation in the magnitude of 
rise. In addition, the 3-hr postrun levels of hepcidin were significantly greater
than at 3 hr in the rest trial (3.0 times greater, p < or = .05). Hepcidin levels
continued to increase at 6 hr postrun but failed to significantly differ from the
rest trial (p = .071), possibly because of diurnal influence. Finally, serum iron
levels were significantly increased immediately postrun (1.3 times, p < or =
.05). The authors concluded that high-intensity exercise was responsible for a
significant increase in hepcidin levels subsequent to a significant increase in
IL-6 and serum iron.

PMID: 20175428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Cytokine. 2010 May;50(2):204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2010.01.007. Epub 2010 Feb
18.

Circadian variations of interleukin 6 in coronary circulations of patients with
myocardial infarction.

Bonda T(1), Kaminski KA, Kozuch M, Kozieradzka A, Wojtkowska I, Dobrzycki S,
Kralisz P, Nowak K, Prokopczuk P, Musial WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University of Bialystok, Department of Cardiology, ul. Sklodowskiej
24a, Bialystok, Poland.

We hypothesize that higher morbidity of patients with ST-segment elevation
myocardial infarction (STEMI) in the out-of-office hours differences in outcome
after myocardial infarction may depend on the concentrations of inflammatory
cytokines. The aim of the study was to determine the relation between the time of
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and local concentration of interleukin 6
(IL-6) and its soluble receptors (sIL-6R and sgp130) in patients with
STEMI.METHODS AND RESULTS: The study included 32 patients with invasively treated
left anterior descending artery occlusion and no significant co-morbidities.
Blood samples were drawn from coronary sinus and aorta before and after
intervention. Patients admitted in the afternoon (13-20) presented significantly 
higher mean IL-6 levels in all samples than patients admitted in the morning.
There was a positive correlation between time of intervention and concentrations 
of IL-6 in all samplings, but also with transcardiac IL-6 gradient at the end of 
procedure and IL-6 increase during PCI. We did not find any significant
association between time of PCI and concentrations of sIL-6R and sgp130, time
from pain to balloon, angiographic parameters or medical history.
CONCLUSIONS: Coronary concentration of IL-6 in patients with STEMI is
significantly higher in the afternoon than in the morning. This might be involved
in increased morbidity of those patients.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Crit Care Med. 2010 Mar;38(3):751-8. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3181cd131c.

In vivo endotoxin synchronizes and suppresses clock gene expression in human
peripheral blood leukocytes.

Haimovich B(1), Calvano J, Haimovich AD, Calvano SE, Coyle SM, Lowry SF.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery, Division of Surgical Sciences, University of
Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New
Brunswick, NJ.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2010 Mar;38(3):977-8.

OBJECTIVES: The intravenous administration of a bolus dose of endotoxin to
healthy human subjects triggers acute systemic inflammatory responses that
include cytokine production and dynamic changes in gene expression in peripheral 
blood leukocytes. This study sought to determine the state of clock gene
expression in human peripheral blood leukocytes, and leukocyte subpopulations,
challenged with in vivo endotoxin at two circadian/diurnal phases of the clock.
DESIGN: Clinical and laboratory investigation.
SETTING: University-based research laboratory and clinical research center.
SUBJECTS: Human volunteers.
INTERVENTIONS: Human subjects were administered a standard dose of endotoxin (2
ng/kg) or saline at either 0900 or 2100 hrs. Blood samples were collected at
selected time points pre- and postinfusion.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Clock gene expression was determined in human
peripheral blood leukocytes, neutrophils, and monocytes by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The fold change for each gene was determined by use of
the 2 method. We show that endotoxin causes profound suppression of circadian
clock gene expression, clearly manifested in human peripheral blood leukocytes,
neutrophils, and monocytes. Clock, Cry1-2, Per3, CSNK1epsilon, Rora, and Rev-erb 
gene expression were all reduced by 80% to 90% with the nadir between 3 and 6 hrs
postinfusion. Per1 and Per2 reached an expression nadir between 13 and 17 hrs
postinfusion. The levels of plasma interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor peaked
and then returned to baseline within 6 hrs. In contrast, clock gene expression
remained suppressed for up to 17 hrs irrespective of the phase of the clock at
the time of the endotoxin challenge. Endotoxin did not perturb the melatonin
secretory rhythm.
CONCLUSIONS: Circadian clock gene expression in peripheral blood leukocytes is
dramatically altered and possibly uncoupled from the activity of the central
clock during periods of acute systemic inflammation. The realignment of the
central and peripheral clocks may constitute a previously unappreciated key
factor affecting recovery from disease in humans.

PMCID: PMC2929957
PMID: 20081528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Przegl Lek. 2010;67(11):1172-4.

[Cytokines as a marker of the different paroxysmal sleep events in children].

[Article in Polish]

Kaciński M(1), Zajac A, Skowronek-Bała B, Biedrón A, Budziszewska B, Leśkiewicz
M.

Author information: 
(1)Klinika Neurologii Dzieciecej, Uniwersytet Jagielloński Collegium Medicum,
Kraków. neupedkr@cm-uj.krakow.pl

BACKGROUND: Parasomnias in children manifest by unwanted behavior and various
clinical picture. These disorders are associated with different sleep phases
(REM, NREM) and sometimes threaten safety of children's sleep. They require
differentiation with epileptic seizures because about 30% of epileptic seizures
is associated with sleep. Some cytokines serum concentration changes were
observed in sleep disturbances.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The search for peripheral markers of paroxysmal sleep disorders
in children, which would be more simple method for differentiating between
parasomnias and epileptic seizures.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study included 21 hospitalized children (17 with
epilepsy and 4 with parasomnias) at the age range from 2 months to 14 years.
Their 2,5-hour sleep was recorded with videoelectroencephalography. Blood samples
were taken two times (before sleep and up to 30 minutes after seizure occurrence 
or after 2,5-hour registration without seizure). Cytokine concentration (IL-6 and
IL-8) was determined in these samples. Statistical analysis of the obtained
results was performed.
RESULTS: The arithmetic means of both cytokine concentrations did not differ
significantly between both examined groups of children, before and after videoEEG
performance. Statistically significant differences of mean cytokine
concentrations were also not found in children from both groups, between samples 
after sleep registration and before videoEEG. Comparison of the arithmetic means 
of IL-6 and IL-8 concentrations after calculating all values before videoEEG and 
after sleep registration was also performed in children with epilepsy and
parasomnias altogether. Similarly, these values did not differ significantly.
Comparison of the means of all concentrations of both cytokines between groups of
children with epilepsy and parasomnias was performed and also did not differ
significantly.
CONCLUSION: IL-6 as well as IL-8 concentrations can not have practical use in
diagnostics of children's paroxysmal sleep disorders because they do not
differentiate basic types of these disorders such as epilepsy and parasomnias.

PMID: 21442971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Sleep Res. 2010 Jun;19(2):341-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2869.2009.00787.x. Epub
2009 Dec 16.

The activation of the inflammatory cytokines in overweight patients with mild
obstructive sleep apnoea.

Sahlman J(1), Miettinen K, Peuhkurinen K, Seppä J, Peltonen M, Herder C, Punnonen
K, Vanninen E, Gylling H, Partinen M, Uusitupa M, Tuomilehto H; Kuopio Sleep
Apnoea Group.

Collaborators: Poutiainen T, Pukkila M, Smirnov G, Kemppainen T, Laitinen T,
Lyyra-Laitinen T, Ikonen A, Vanninen R, Viinamäki H, Venäläinen K, Soini E,
Martikainen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Kuopio
University Hospital and University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.

It is widely accepted that obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is linked with
cardiovascular diseases. The relationship is complex and remains still poorly
understood. The presence of chronic systemic inflammation has been connected with
pathogenesis of both OSA and cardiovascular diseases. While atherogenesis is
believed to be a process of many years, little is known about the potential
impact of the largest OSA subgroup, mild OSA, on the development of
cardiovascular diseases. The aim of the present study was to assess whether
untreated mild OSA is associated with an activation of inflammatory cytokine
system. The adult study population consisted of two groups: 84 patients with mild
OSA [apnoea-hypopnoea index (AHI) 5-15 h(-1)] and 40 controls (AHI <5 h(-1)).
Serum concentrations of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines were measured before
any interventions. After adjustments for age, sex, body mass index, fat
percentage, most important cardiometabolic and inflammatory diseases, and
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication, the mean level of tumour necrosis
factor-alpha was significantly elevated (1.54 versus 1.17 pg mL(-1), P = 0.004), 
whereas the level of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta) was reduced (0.19 versus 0.23
pg mL(-1), P = 0.004) in patients with mild OSA compared with controls. The
concentrations of the protective anti-inflammatory cytokines, interleukin-10
(1.28 versus 0.70 pg mL(-1), P < 0.001) and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
(478 versus 330 pg mL(-1), P = 0.003) were elevated in the OSA group. The
concentrations of C-reactive protein increased, but IL-1 beta decreased along
with the increase of AHI. Mild OSA was found to be associated not only with the
activation of the pro-inflammatory, but also with the anti-inflammatory systems.

PMID: 20040038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Hum Biol. 2010 Jul-Aug;22(4):463-72. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.21018.

Modeling multisystem biological risk in young adults: The Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults Study.

Seeman T(1), Gruenewald T, Karlamangla A, Sidney S, Liu K, McEwen B, Schwartz J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Geriatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California 90095-1687, USA. tseeman@mednet.ucla.edu

Although much prior research has focused on identifying the roles of major
regulatory systems in health risks, the concept of allostatic load (AL) focuses
on the importance of a more multisystems view of health risks. How best to
operationalize allostatic load, however, remains the subject of some debate. We
sought to test a hypothesized metafactor model of allostatic load composed of a
number of biological system factors, and to investigate model invariance across
sex and ethnicity. Biological data from 782 men and women, aged 32-47, from the
Oakland, CA and Chicago, IL sites of the Coronary Artery Risk Development in
Young Adults Study (CARDIA) were collected as part of the Year 15exam in 2000.
These include measures of blood pressure, metabolic parameters (glucose, insulin,
lipid profiles, and waist circumference), markers of inflammation (interleukin-6,
C-reactive protein, and fibrinogen), heart rate variability, sympathetic nervous 
system activity (12-hr urinary norepinephrine and epinephrine) and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity (diurnal salivary free cortisol). A 
"metafactor" model of AL as an aggregate measure of six underlying latent
biological subfactors was found to fit the data, with the metafactor structure
capturing 84% of variance of all pairwise associations among biological
subsystems. There was little evidence of model variance across sex and/or
ethnicity. These analyses extend work operationalizing AL as a multisystems index
of biological dysregulation, providing initial support for a model of AL as a
metaconstruct of inter-relationships among multiple biological regulatory
systems, that varies little across sex or ethnicity.

PMCID: PMC3727401
PMID: 20039257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Gerontology. 2010;56(1):41-50. doi: 10.1159/000264654. Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Sleep and biomarkers of atherosclerosis in elderly Alzheimer caregivers and
controls.

von Känel R(1), Ancoli-Israel S, Dimsdale JE, Mills PJ, Mausbach BT, Ziegler MG, 
Patterson TL, Grant I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, Inselspital, University Hospital and 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Perturbed sleep might contribute to cardiovascular disease by
accelerating atherosclerosis. Sleep is poor in Alzheimer caregivers who are also 
a group at increased cardiovascular risk.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that impaired sleep relates to elevated levels 
of biomarkers of atherosclerosis in community-dwelling elderly and that this
association would possibly be stronger in caregivers than in non-caregiving
controls.
METHODS: We studied 97 Alzheimer caregivers and 48 non-caregiving controls (mean 
age 71 +/- 8 years, 72% women) who underwent wrist actigraphy at their homes.
Measures of objective sleep were averaged across 3 consecutive nights. The
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index was administered by an interviewer to rate
subjective sleep quality. Morning fasting blood samples were collected to
determine measures of inflammation, coagulation and endothelial dysfunction.
RESULTS: There were independent associations between decreased subjective sleep
quality and increased levels of fibrin D-dimer (p = 0.022, DeltaR(2) = 0.029) and
von Willebrand factor antigen (p = 0.029, DeltaR(2) = 0.034) in all participants.
Percent sleep (p = 0.025) and subjective sleep quality (p = 0.017) were lower in 
caregivers than in controls. In caregivers, the correlation between decreased
percent sleep and elevated levels of interleukin-6 (p = 0.042, DeltaR(2) = 0.039)
and C-reactive protein (p < 0.10, DeltaR(2) = 0.027) was significantly stronger
than in controls.
CONCLUSION: Perceived impairment in sleep related to increased coagulation
activity and endothelial dysfunction in all participants, whereas objectively
impaired sleep related to inflammation activity in caregivers. The findings
provide one explanation for the increased cardiovascular risk in elderly poor
sleepers and dementia caregivers in particular.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2844340
PMID: 19955705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2010 Feb;42(2):314-25. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181b11ab7.

Resistance training at eight-repetition maximum reduces the inflammatory milieu
in elderly women.

Phillips MD(1), Flynn MG, McFarlin BK, Stewart LK, Timmerman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Christian University, Exercise Physiology Laboratory, Fort Worth, TX
76123, USA. m.phillips@tcu.edu

INTRODUCTION/PURPOSE: Inflammatory cytokines are associated with age- and
inactivity-related diseases. We examined the influence of moderate- to
high-intensity resistance trainings (RT) on inflammatory cytokines (interleukin 6
(IL-6) and 1beta (IL-1beta) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)) in
circulation and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated whole blood in elderly women.
METHOD: Previously sedentary women (72 +/- 6.1 yr) were grouped according to
their hormone replacement regimen: traditional estrogen/progesterone (HRT, n =
12), selective estrogen receptor modulator (SER, n = 7), no hormone replacement
(NHR, n = 9), or nonexercise control group taking no hormone replacement (CON, n 
= 7). Participants in the HRT, SER, and NHR groups trained (three sets, 10
exercises at eight-repetition maximum (8RM)) 3 d x wk(-1), whereas participants
in the CON group maintained their "normal" activity for 10 wk. Participants
performed a bout of resistance exercise (RE at 8RM; HRT, SER, and NHR groups) or 
sat quietly (CON) before (BT) and after (AT) RT to assess the influence of
training on the acute responses to RE. Blood samples were obtained preexercise
(PR), postexercise (PO), and 2 h postexercise (2H; same time points for resting
CON).
RESULTS: Hormone status had no influence on dependent variables, so HRT, SER, and
NHR groups were collapsed into one exercise group (EX, n = 28) and compared with 
CON. RT significantly reduced resting serum TNF-alpha level by 37%. RT also
reduced LPS-stimulated production of IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha at all time
points (PR, PO, and 2H; per monocyte). Acute RE transiently increased plasma
TNF-alpha, but blunted the circadian increase in LPS-stimulated inflammatory
cytokines observed in CON. The blunting effect in EX was significantly greater AT
compared with BT. RE also resulted in an increase in plasma IL-6, which was
significantly reduced AT (BT: PR = 1.6 +/- 0.5, PO = 2.8 +/- 0.5; AT: PR = 1.8
+/- 0.3, PO = 2.4 +/- 0.3).
CONCLUSIONS: We found that 10 wk of moderate- to high-intensity RT 1) reduced the
systemic inflammatory milieu and 2) abrogated exercise-induced circulating IL-6
in previously sedentary elderly women.

PMID: 19927028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Integr Cancer Ther. 2009 Dec;8(4):329-36. doi: 10.1177/1534735409352029. Epub
2009 Nov 18.

Circadian disruption, Per3, and human cytokine secretion.

Guess J(1), Burch JB, Ogoussan K, Armstead CA, Zhang H, Wagner S, Hebert JR, Wood
P, Youngstedt SD, Hofseth LJ, Singh UP, Xie D, Hrushesky WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Cancer Prevention and Control
Program, University of South Carolina, 915 Greene Street, Columbia, SC 29208,
USA.

Circadian disruption has been linked with inflammation, an established cancer
risk factor. Per3 clock gene polymorphisms have also been associated with
circadian disruption and with increased cancer risk. Patients completed a
questionnaire and provided a blood sample prior to undergoing a colonoscopy (n = 
70). Adjusted mean serum cytokine concentrations (IL-6, TNF-alpha, gamma-INF,
IL-1ra, IL-1-beta, VEGF) were compared among patients with high and low scores
for fatigue (Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory), depressive symptoms (Beck
Depression Inventory II), or sleep disruption (Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index),
or among patients with different Per3 clock gene variants. Poor sleep was
associated with elevated VEGF, and fatigue-related reduced activity was
associated with elevated TNF-alpha concentrations. Participants with the 4/5 or
5/5 Per3 variable tandem repeat sequence had elevated IL-6 concentrations
compared to those with the 4/4 genotype. Biological processes linking circadian
disruption with cancer remain to be elucidated. Increased inflammatory cytokine
secretion may play a role.

PMCID: PMC2959170
PMID: 19926609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010 Jan;108(1):68-75. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00851.2009. Epub 2009 Nov 12.

Effect of acute sleep deprivation on vascular function in healthy subjects.

Sauvet F(1), Leftheriotis G, Gomez-Merino D, Langrume C, Drogou C, Van Beers P,
Bourrilhon C, Florence G, Chennaoui M.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Environnements Opérationnels, IRBA-Antenne IMASSA, F-91223
Brétigny sur Orge, France. fsauvet@imassa.fr

Sleep disorders are associated with inflammation and sympathetic activation,
which are suspected to induce endothelial dysfunction, a key factor in the
increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Less is known about the early effects
of acute sleep deprivation on vascular function. We evaluated microvascular
reactivity and biological markers of endothelial activation during continuous 40 
h of total sleep deprivation (TSD) in 12 healthy men (29 +/- 3 yr). The days
before [day 1 (D1)] and during TSD (D3), at 1200 and 1800, endothelium-dependent 
and -independent cutaneous vascular conductance was assessed by iontophoresis of 
acetylcholine and sodium nitroprusside, respectively, coupled to laser-Doppler
flowmetry. At 0900, 1200, 1500, and 1800, heart rate (HR) and instantaneous blood
pressure (BP) were recorded in the supine position. At D1, D3, and the day after 
one night of sleep recovery (D4), markers of vascular endothelial cell
activation, including soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1, vascular cell
adhesion molecule-1, E-selectin, and interleukin-6 were measured from blood
samples at 0800. Compared with D1, plasma levels of E-selectin were raised at D3,
whereas intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and interleukin-6 were raised at D4 (P 
< 0.05). The endothelium-dependent and -independent CVC were significantly
decreased after 29 h of TSD (P < 0.05). By contrast, HR, systolic BP, and the
normalized low-frequency component of HR variability (0.04-0.15 Hz), a marker of 
the sympathetic activity, increased significantly within 32 h of TSD (P < 0.05). 
In conclusion, acute exposure to 40 h of TSD appears to cause vascular
dysfunction before the increase in sympathetic activity and systolic BP.

PMID: 19910332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;18(3):364-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.176. Epub 2009 Nov 
4.

Genetic variants in human CLOCK associate with total energy intake and cytokine
sleep factors in overweight subjects (GOLDN population).

Garaulet M(1), Lee YC, Shen J, Parnell LD, Arnett DK, Tsai MY, Lai CQ, Ordovas
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain. garaulet@um.es

Despite the importance of total energy intake in circadian system regulation, no 
study has related human CLOCK gene polymorphisms and food-intake measures. The
aim of this study was to analyze the associations of CLOCK single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with food intake and to explore the specific role of the
cytokine system. A total of 1100 individual participants in the Genetics of Lipid
Lowering Drugs and Diet Network (GOLDN) study were included. Dietary intake was
estimated with a validated questionnaire. Interleukin-6 (IL-6), monocyte
chemotactic protein 1 (MCP1), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), IL-2
soluble receptor-alpha (IL-2sR-alpha) and adiponectin plasma concentrations were 
measured. Our results showed that four of five CLOCK SNPs selected were
significantly associated with total energy intake (P<0.05). For SNP rs3749474,
the energy intake and total fat, protein and carbohydrate intakes were
significantly higher in minor allele carriers than in non-carriers. Frequency of 
the minor allele was greater in subjects with high energy intake than in those
with low intake. Subjects with the minor allele were 1.33 times more likely to
have high energy intake than non-carriers (95% CI 1.09-1.72, P=0.0350). All CLOCK
SNPs were associated with plasma cytokine values, in particular with those that
were highly correlated with energy intake: MCP1, IL-6 and adiponectin.
Interestingly, minor allele carriers with high energy intake showed decreased
cytokine values, which could be related with a lower anorectic effect and
decreased sleep in these subjects. In conclusion, we show a novel association of 
genetic variation at CLOCK with total energy intake, which was particularly
relevant for SNP rs3749474. Associations could be mediated through the alteration
of cytokine levels that may influence energy intake and sleep pattern.

PMCID: PMC2987209
PMID: 19888304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Curr Drug Targets. 2009 Oct;10(10):1001-8.

Inflammatory systemic biomarkers in setting acute coronary syndromes--effects of 
the diurnal variation.

Dominguez-Rodriguez A(1), Abreu-Gonzalez P, Kaski JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology (Coronary Care Unit), University Hospital of
Canarias, Tenerife, Spain. adrvdg@hotmail.com

Clinicians have used additional tools to aid clinical assessment and to enhance
their ability to identify the "vulnerable" patient at risk for cardiovascular
diseases. Circulating biomarkers are one such tool used for identifying better
high-risk individuals and to prognosticate effectively and treat patients with
disease. A persistent immune activation is a main feature of atherosclerosis. The
inflammatory activity is not only detectable in the vascular wall, but also in
peripheral blood. Patients with coronary artery disease show increased numbers of
neutrophils and T cells as well as elevated levels of several inflammatory
mediators. On the other hand, several cardiovascular disease states show a daily 
cycle of activity, i.e. a peak incidence of cerebrovascular and cardiovascular
events has been documented in the early morning hours. Several studies have shown
diurnal variations in inflammatory systemic markers in patients with acute
coronary syndrome. Diurnal variations can alter the analysis of blood-derived
samples. Prior to the analysis of a blood sample, multiple steps are necessary to
generate the desired specimen. The knowledge of diurnal variations is a
prerequisite to understand and control their impact. This brief review comments
the effect of the diurnal variation on the most important inflammatory systemic
biomarkers in the setting acute coronary syndrome: interleukin-6, neopterin,
matrix metalloproteinases, vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, intercellular
adhesión molecule-1, soluble CD40 ligand, and C-reactive protein.

PMID: 19860643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Pediatr Neonatol. 2009 Oct;50(5):222-9. doi: 10.1016/S1875-9572(09)60067-X.

Sleep quality and immune mediators in asthmatic children.

Wang MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics,
Tungs' Taichung Metroharbor Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. wmflily@yahoo.com.tw

BACKGROUND: Asthmatic children have been reported to complain about poor sleep
quality. Recent research has demonstrated a relationship between sleep and
circulating cytokines. This study aimed to assess the relationship between serum 
cytokine levels and sleep quality in asthmatic children.
METHODS: After an initial screening phase at allergy clinic visits, 90 asthmatic 
children aged 6-12 years were enrolled to complete the Chinese version of the
(Childhood) Asthma Control Test (ACT). A questionnaire assessing sleep quality of
asthmatic children was also administered to all subjects and parents. We
determined the serum levels of interleukin (IL)-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, total
immunoglobulin (Ig) E, and protactin at enrollment.
RESULTS: Subjects with an ACT score > or =20 were assigned to the well-controlled
group and those with a score of 19 were assigned to the inadequately controlled
group. In the well-controlled group, good sleepers had a significantly tower mean
level of IL-10 and a higher mean ratio of IL-12/IL-10 compared with the poor
sleepers. Furthermore, the serum prolactin level was significantly greater in the
good sleeper subgroup. In both subgroups, the concentrations of IL-6, IL-12 and
total IgE were not significant different.
CONCLUSION: Good sleep is associated with a lower IL-10 level, a higher prolactin
concentration, and a higher IL-12/IL-10 ratio. Prolactin may have a potential
role in this immunity shift. Thus, further insight into the functional role of
cytokines on the sleep quality of asthma sufferers will result in the
identification of novel therapeutic perspectives.

PMID: 19856866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5358-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802736. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

MAIL regulates human monocyte IL-6 production.

Seshadri S(1), Kannan Y, Mitra S, Parker-Barnes J, Wewers MD.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute and Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care 
and Sleep Medicine Division, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

IL-6 is a pleiotropic cytokine implicated in the pathogenesis of disorders such
as sepsis and cancer. We noted that human monocytes are excellent producers of
IL-6 as compared with monocyte-derived macrophages. Because macrophages from
molecule containing ankyrin repeats induced by LPS (MAIL) knockout animals have
suppressed IL-6 production, we hypothesized that regulation of MAIL is key to
IL-6 production in humans and may explain the differences between human monocytes
and macrophages. To test this hypothesis fresh human monocytes and
monocyte-derived macrophages were compared for MAIL expression in response to
LPS. LPS-induced monocyte MAIL expression was highly inducible and transient.
Importantly for our hypothesis MAIL protein expression was suppressed during
differentiation of monocytes to macrophages. Of note, the human MAIL protein
detected was the 80 kDa MAIL-L form and human MAIL showed nuclear localization.
Human MAIL-L bound to p50 subunit of the NF-kappaB and increased IL-6 luciferase 
promoter activity in a cEBPbeta, NF-kappaB, and AP-1-dependent fashion. Like the 
differences in MAIL induction, monocytes produced 6-fold more IL-6 compared with 
macrophages (81.7 +/- 29.7 vs 12.6 +/- 6.8 ng/ml). Furthermore, suppression of
MAIL by small interfering RNA decreased the production of IL-6 significantly in
both THP-1 cells and in primary monocytes. Costimulation of monocytes with LPS
and muramyl dipeptide induced an enhanced IL-6 response that was suppressed by
siMAIL. Our data suggests that MAIL is a key regulator of IL-6 production in
human monocytes and plays an important role in both TLR and NOD-like receptor
ligand induced inflammation.

PMID: 19783680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Neurotrauma. 2010 Jan;27(1):189-95. doi: 10.1089/neu.2009.1014.

Cortisol dynamics in the acute phase of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage:
associations with disease severity and outcome.

Poll EM(1), Boström A, Bürgel U, Reinges MH, Hans FJ, Gilsbach JM,
Kreitschmann-Andermahr I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
epoll@ukaachen.de

The purpose of this study was to assess cortisol dynamics in the acute phase
after aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) and to set the parameters of
cortisol release in relation to the severity of illness and outcome. In 22
consecutive patients with aneurysmal SAH, cortisol, corticosteroid binding
globulin, interleukin-6, and adrenocorticotrophic hormone were measured
immediately after hospital admission (t(0)), 7 days (t(1)) later, and at least 14
days later (t(2)). Additionally, diurnal profiles of cortisol secretion were
assessed at t(1) and t(2), and area under the curve (AUC) was computed for
calculated free serum cortisol (CFSC). In this study, normal diurnal CFSC
profiles were associated with a significantly shorter ICU-stay, less
complications, and a more favorable outcome than abnormal diurnal profiles. AUC
and 8 a.m. cortisol were not related to clinical course or outcome. It is
concluded that cortisol secretion patterns are associated with the severity and
outcome of SAH. For an appraisal of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in SAH
patients, single cortisol measurements are insufficient.

PMID: 19772477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Appl Physiol Nutr Metab. 2009 Aug;34(4):587-94. doi: 10.1139/H09-014.

Effects of Ramadan fasting on physical performance and metabolic, hormonal, and
inflammatory parameters in middle-distance runners.

Chennaoui M(1), Desgorces F, Drogou C, Boudjemaa B, Tomaszewski A, Depiesse F,
Burnat P, Chalabi H, Gomez-Merino D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, IMASSA, Bretigny-sur-Orge, France.
mchennaoui@imassa.fr

The Ramadan fasting (RF) period is associated with changes in sleep habits and
increased sleepiness, which may affect physical performance in athletes, and may 
induce metabolic, hormonal, and inflammatory disturbances. In 8 middle-distance
athletes (25.0 +/- 1.3 years), a maximal aerobic velocity (MAV) test was
performed 5 days before RF (day -5), and on days 7 and 21 of RF. The same days,
saliva samples were collected to determine cortisol and testosterone
concentrations before and after the MAV test. Blood samples were collected before
RF (P1), at the end of RF (P2), and 1 week post RF (P3). Plasma levels of
interleukin (IL)-6, a mediator of sleepiness and energy availability, were
determined. We also evaluated changes in metabolic and hormonal parameters, mood 
state, and nutritional and sleep profiles. During RF, mean body mass and body fat
did not statistically change. Compared with day -5, MAV values decreased at days 
7 and 21 (p < 0.05, respectively), while testosterone/cortisol ratio values did
not change significantly. Nocturnal sleep time and energy intake were lower at
day 21 than before RF (day 0/P1) (p < 0.05). At the end of RF (day 31), the
fatigue score on the Profile of Mood States questionnaire was increased (p <
0.001). For P2 vs. P1, IL-6 was increased (1.19 +/- 0.25 vs. 0.51 +/- 0.13
pg.mL-1; p < 0.05), melatonin levels were decreased (p < 0.05), and adrenalin and
noradrenalin were increased (p < 0.01 and p < 0.001, respectively). At 7 days
post RF, all parameters recovered to pre-RF values. In conclusion, RF is
accompanied by significant metabolic, hormonal, and inflammatory changes. Sleep
disturbances, energy deficiency, and fatigue during RF may decrease physical
performance in Muslim athletes who maintain training. Reduction of work load and 
(or) daytime napping may represent adequate strategies to counteract RF effects
for Muslim athletes.

PMID: 19767792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5534-40. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2584.
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

Inflammatory biomarkers and fatigue during radiation therapy for breast and
prostate cancer.

Bower JE(1), Ganz PA, Tao ML, Hu W, Belin TR, Sepah S, Cole S, Aziz N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1563, USA.
jbower@ucla.edu

PURPOSE: Biomarkers of radiation-induced behavioral symptoms, such as fatigue,
have not been identified. Studies linking inflammatory processes to fatigue in
cancer survivors led us to test the hypothesis that activation of the
proinflammatory cytokine network is associated with fatigue symptoms during
radiation therapy for breast and prostate cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Individuals with early-stage breast (n = 28) and prostate
cancer (n = 20) completed questionnaires and provided blood samples for
determination of serum levels of interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta) and IL-6 at
assessments conducted before, during, and after a course of radiation therapy.
Serum markers of proinflammatory cytokine activity, including IL-1 receptor
antagonist and C-reactive protein, were examined in a subset of participants.
Random coefficient models were used to evaluate the association between changes
in cytokine levels and fatigue.
RESULTS: As expected, there was a significant increase in fatigue during
radiation treatment. Changes in serum levels of inflammatory markers C-reactive
protein and IL-1 receptor antagonist were positively associated with increases in
fatigue symptoms (Ps < 0.05), although serum levels of IL-1beta and IL-6 were not
associated with fatigue. These effects remained significant (Ps < 0.05) in
analyses controlling for potential biobehavioral confounding factors, including
age, body mass index, hormone therapy, depression, and sleep disturbance.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that activation of the proinflammatory cytokine
network and associated increases in downstream biomarkers of proinflammatory
cytokine activity are associated with fatigue during radiation therapy for breast
and prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC2884979
PMID: 19706826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diabetes Care. 2009 Nov;32(11):1965-71. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1980. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

Sleep duration, lifestyle intervention, and incidence of type 2 diabetes in
impaired glucose tolerance: The Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study.

Tuomilehto H(1), Peltonen M, Partinen M, Lavigne G, Eriksson JG, Herder C, Aunola
S, Keinänen-Kiukaanniemi S, Ilanne-Parikka P, Uusitupa M, Tuomilehto J, Lindström
J; Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Kuopio University Hospital, and University 
of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland. henri.tuomilehto@kuh.fi

OBJECTIVE: Both short and long sleep duration have frequently been found to be
associated with an increased risk for diabetes. The aim of the present
exploratory analysis was to examine the association between sleep duration and
type 2 diabetes after lifestyle intervention in overweight individuals with
impaired glucose tolerance in a 7-year prospective follow-up.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 522 individuals (aged 40-64 years) were
randomly allocated either to an intensive diet-exercise counseling group or to a 
control group. Diabetes incidence during follow-up was calculated according to
sleep duration at baseline. Sleep duration was obtained for a 24-h period.
Physical activity, dietary intakes, body weight, and immune mediators (C-reactive
protein and interleukin-6) were measured.
RESULTS: Interaction between sleep duration and treatment group was statistically
significant (P = 0.003). In the control group, the adjusted hazard ratios (HRs)
(95% CI) for diabetes were 2.29 (1.38-3.80) and 2.74 (1.67-4.50) in the sleep
duration groups 9-9.5 h and >or=10 h, respectively, compared with for that of the
7-8.5 h group. In contrast, sleep duration did not influence the incidence of
diabetes in the intervention group; for sleep duration groups 9-9.5 h and >or=10 
h, the adjusted HRs (95% CI) were 1.10 (0.60-2.01) and 0.73 (0.34-1.56),
respectively, compared with that in the reference group (7-8.5 h sleep).
Lifestyle intervention resulted in similar improvement in body weight, insulin
sensitivity, and immune mediator levels regardless of sleep duration.
CONCLUSIONS: Long sleep duration is associated with increased type 2 diabetes
risk. Lifestyle intervention with the aim of weight reduction, healthy diet, and 
increased physical activity may ameliorate some of this excess risk.

PMCID: PMC2768215
PMID: 19651919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Sleep. 2009 Jul;32(7):857-64.

Gender differences in the cross-sectional relationships between sleep duration
and markers of inflammation: Whitehall II study.

Miller MA(1), Kandala NB, Kivimaki M, Kumari M, Brunner EJ, Lowe GD, Marmot MG,
Cappuccio FP.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Warwick, Clinical Sciences Research Institute, UHCW Campus, 
Warwick Medical School, Coventry, UK. michelle.miller@warwick.ac.uk

Comment in
    Sleep. 2009 Jul;32(7):841-2.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationships between sleep and inflammatory markers
because these may be important in the development of cardiovascular disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The relationship between self-reported sleep duration and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) (n = 4642) and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) 
(n = 4677) was examined in individuals from the Whitehall II study. Following
multiple adjustments, there were no overall linear or nonlinear trends between
sleep duration and IL-6. However, in women but not men (interaction P < 0.05),
levels of IL-6 tended to be lower in individuals who slept 8 hours (11% [95%
confidence interval 4 to 17]) as compared to 7 hours. With hs-CRP, in the
adjusted model, there was no association between hs-CRP and sleep duration in
men. However, there was a significant nonlinear association in women, the level
of hs-CRP being significantly higher in women short sleepers (5 hours or less)
after multiple adjustments (P = 0.04) (interaction P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: No significant variation in inflammatory markers with sleep duration
was observed in men. By contrast, both IL-6 and hs-CRP levels varied with sleep
duration in women. The observed pattern of variation was different according to
the inflammatory marker observed. Further longitudinal studies are required to
fully investigate possible temporal relationships between short sleep and markers
of inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2706900
PMID: 19639748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;42(6):706-15. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0065OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 27.

Sequential activation of protein kinase C isoforms by organic dust is mediated by
tumor necrosis factor.

Wyatt TA(1), Slager RE, Heires AJ, Devasure JM, Vonessen SG, Poole JA, Romberger 
DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep & Allergy
Section, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985300 Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, NE 68198-5300, USA. twyatt@unmc.edu

Dust samples collected from Nebraska swine confinement facilities (hog dust
extract [HDE]) are known to elicit proinflammatory cytokine release from human
bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells in vitro. This response involves the activation 
of two protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms: PKCalpha and PKCepsilon. Experiments were
designed to investigate the relationship between the two isoenzymes and the
degree to which each is responsible for cytokine release in HBE. Experiments also
examined the contribution of TNF-alpha to IL-6 and IL-8 release. PKCalpha and
PKCepsilon activities were inhibited using isoform-specific pharmacologic
inhibitors and genetically modified dominant-negative (DN) expressing cell lines.
Release of the proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha was measured
and PKC isoform activities assessed. We found that HDE stimulates PKCalpha
activity by 1 hour, and within 6 hours the activity returns to baseline.
PKCalpha-specific inhibitor or PKCalphaDN cells abolish this HDE-mediated effect.
Both IL-6 and IL-8 release are likewise diminished under these conditions
compared with normal HBE, and treatment with TNF-alpha-neutralizing antibody does
not further inhibit cytokine release. In contrast, PKCepsilon activity was
enhanced by 6 hours after HDE treatment. TNF-alpha blockade abrogated this
effect. HDE-stimulated IL-6, but not IL-8 release in PKCepsilonDN cells. The
concentration of TNF-alpha released by HDE-stimulated HBE is sufficient to have a
potent cytokine-eliciting effect. A time course of TNF-alpha release suggests
that TNF-alpha is produced after PKCalpha activation, but before PKCepsilon.
These results suggest a temporal ordering of events responsible for the release
of cytokines, which initiate and exacerbate inflammatory events in the airways of
people exposed to agricultural dust.

PMCID: PMC2891498
PMID: 19635931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Life Sci. 2009 Aug 26;85(9-10):372-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2009.07.002. Epub 2009
Jul 17.

Influence of intermittent hypoxia on the signal transduction pathways to
inflammatory response and circadian clock regulation.

Burioka N(1), Koyanagi S, Fukuoka Y, Okazaki F, Fujioka T, Kusunose N, Endo M,
Suyama H, Chikumi H, Ohdo S, Shimizu E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Molecular Respirology, Faculty of Medicine,
Tottori University, 36-1 Nishimachi, Yonago 683-8504, Japan.
burioka@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

AIMS: Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), characterized by intermittent
hypoxia/reoxygenation (IHR), is often associated with changing levels of
circulating inflammatory cytokines and causes excessive daytime sleepiness, mood 
disturbances, and cardiovascular disease. An abnormal rhythm in the expression of
circadian clock genes is observed in OSAS patients, and is also implicated in
OSAS-related clinical symptoms. IHR-induced signal transduction is thought to
underlie OSAS-associated complications. The aim of this study is to elucidate the
influence of IHR on signal transduction pathways to inflammatory response and
circadian clock regulation.
MAIN METHODS: To evaluate the direct action of IHR on intracellular signaling, we
used a cell culture model to explore the underlying transcriptional events
initiated by IHR.
KEY FINDINGS: Treatment of cultured human lung adenocarcinoma epithelial cells
(A549) with IHR resulted in the elevation of mRNA levels of an inflammation
cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6), due to activation of the signaling pathway of
nuclear factor-kappaB, a potent transcriptional activator of IL-6. On the other
hand, the treatment of cells with IHR had little effect on clock gene response
element-driven transcription. As a consequence, there was no significant change
in mRNA levels of clock genes in IHR-treated cells.
SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that IHR can activate signal transduction to 
an inflammatory response, but not to circadian clock regulation. The abnormal
rhythm in the expression of clock genes in OSAS patients is attributable to the
changed levels of circulating factors that have the ability to modulate clock
gene expression.

PMID: 19616563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Eur Respir J. 2010 Apr;35(4):843-50. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00075409. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Myeloid-related protein 8/14 levels in children with obstructive sleep apnoea.

Kim J(1), Bhattacharjee R, Snow AB, Capdevila OS, Kheirandish-Gozal L, Gozal D.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Paediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is common in children and leads to multiple
end-organ morbidities. Myeloid-related protein (MRP) 8/14 plays an important
pathophysiological role in atherosclerosis, and plasma levels correlate with
endothelial cell dysfunction. We hypothesised that MRP8/14 levels would be
altered in children with OSA. 255 children (aged 7.6+/-1.5 yrs) were included
after a sleep study and a morning blood sample. MRP8/14 and interleukin-6 plasma 
levels were assayed using ELISA and C-reactive protein by immunoturbidometry.
Endothelial function was assessed as the hyperaemic response after occlusion of
the brachial artery. Plasma log MRP8/14 levels showed apnoea/hypopnoea index
(AHI) dose-dependent increases regardless of obesity. Moreover, log MRP8/14
levels correlated with log AHI (r = 0.340, p<0.001) after controlling for age and
body mass index Z-score, and with endothelial function. Children with the highest
MRP levels (>1.34 ug x mL(-1)) had 2.4- and 5.4-fold increased odds of mild OSA
and moderate-to-severe OSA, respectively, after adjusting for confounding
variables. Plasma MRP8/14 levels are associated with paediatric OSA and may
reflect increased risk for cardiovascular morbidity. The short- and long-term
consequences of elevated MRP8/14 on cardiovascular function in the context of
paediatric OSA remain to be defined.

PMID: 19608587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Clin Chim Acta. 2009 Sep;407(1-2):67-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2009.06.034. Epub
2009 Jul 2.

Serum levels of gamma-glutamyl transferase are associated with markers of
nocturnal hypoxemia in a general adult population.

Gude F(1), Rey-Garcia J, Fernandez-Merino C, Meijide L, García-Ortiz L, Zamarron 
C, Gonzalez-Quintela A.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago,
Travesia da Choupana, s/n, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
francisco.gude.sampedro@sergas.es

BACKGROUND: Serum gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) is a well-known marker of
alcohol consumption and liver dysfunction. GGT is also associated with components
of metabolic syndrome, cardiovascular risk factors and obstructive sleep apnea.
In a population-based study, we investigated serum GGT levels in relation to
markers of nocturnal hypoxemia, adjusting for potential confounders. In addition,
we investigated the possible relationship between GGT concentrations and serum
levels of tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6.
METHODS: Demographic data, alcohol consumption, components of metabolic syndrome,
serum liver enzymes, pro-inflammatory cytokines and nocturnal pulse oximetry were
available for 220 individuals, randomly selected from a general adult population.
Of these, overnight polysomnography was available for 70.
RESULTS: A smoothing regression model confirmed that serum GGT levels were
associated positively and independently with male sex (P<0.001), ageing
(P=0.001), heavy smoking (P=0.039), alcohol drinking (P<0.001), and body mass
index (P=0.019). Serum GGT levels were associated negatively and independently
with average arterial oxygen saturation during sleep (P=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum concentrations of GGT are associated with nocturnal arterial
oxygen desaturations.

PMID: 19576874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Periodontol. 2009 Jul;80(7):1146-53. doi: 10.1902/jop.2009.080654.

Within-subject variability in repeated measures of salivary analytes in healthy
adults.

Thomas MV(1), Branscum A, Miller CS, Ebersole J, Al-Sabbagh M, Schuster JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Periodontology, Department of Oral Health Practice, University of 
Kentucky College of Dentistry, Lexington, KY, USA. mvthom0@uky.edu

BACKGROUND: Saliva contains a large number of biomolecules, some of which have
putative diagnostic usefulness. A potential problem with the use of biomolecules 
in diagnosis is day-to-day fluctuation due to within-subject variability. This
study evaluated the intraindividual variability of six salivary analytes in
healthy adults and determined their normal range.
METHODS: Unstimulated whole saliva (5 ml) was collected every 2 to 3 days on six 
occasions from 30 subjects in good oral and systemic health. Four of the samples 
were collected in the clinic, and two were collected by the subject at home. The 
concentration ranges of interleukin (IL)-1beta, IL-6, matrix metalloproteinase-8,
prostaglandin E(2), tumor necrosis factor-alpha, interferon-alpha, and albumin
were examined. Descriptive statistics were computed, and a one-way random-effects
model was used to quantify within- and between-subject components of variability.
Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated for each
subject/analyte combination.
RESULTS: Within-subject coefficients of variation for these analytes ranged from 
67.6% to 172.1% for the in-clinic samples and from 111.9% to 201.0% for the
at-home samples. The ICC for the various analytes ranged from 41% to 61% for the 
in-clinic samples. The at-home samples exhibited significantly more variability
than did those obtained in the clinic under supervision.
CONCLUSIONS: There was marked within-subject variation in the salivary
concentrations of these analytes. With increased interest in salivary
diagnostics, the within-subject variability, normal range, and threshold levels
for abnormal levels of individual salivary analytes need to be determined if
these diagnostics tests are to have clinical usefulness.

PMCID: PMC4131719
PMID: 19563296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Thorax. 2009 Jul;64(7):631-6. doi: 10.1136/thx.2008.105577.

Systemic inflammation: a key factor in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular
complications in obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome?

Ryan S(1), Taylor CT, McNicholas WT.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research Laboratory, St Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.

Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) is a highly prevalent disease and is
recognised as a major public health burden. Large-scale epidemiological studies
have demonstrated an independent relationship between OSAS and various
cardiovascular disorders. The pathogenesis of cardiovascular complications in
OSAS is not completely understood but a multifactorial aetiology is likely.
Inflammatory processes have emerged as critical in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis at all stages of atheroma formation. Increased levels of various 
circulating markers of inflammation including tumour necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha), interleukin 6 (IL6), IL-8 and C-reactive protein (CRP) have been
reported as associated with future cardiovascular risk. There is increasing
evidence of elevated inflammatory markers in OSAS with a significant fall after
effective treatment with continuous positive airway pressure. This evidence is
particularly strong for TNFalpha, whereas studies on IL6 and CRP have yielded
conflicting results possibly due to the confounding effects of obesity. Cell
culture and animal studies have significantly contributed to our understanding of
the underlying mechanisms of the association between OSAS and inflammation.
Intermittent hypoxia, the hallmark of OSAS, results in activation of
pro-inflammatory transcription factors such as nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB)
and activator protein (AP)-1. These promote activation of various inflammatory
cells, particularly lymphocytes and monocytes, with the downstream consequence of
expression of pro-inflammatory mediators that may lead to endothelial
dysfunction. This review provides a critical analysis of the current evidence for
an association between OSAS, inflammation and cardiovascular disease, discusses
basic mechanisms that may be responsible for this association and proposes future
research possibilities.

PMID: 19561283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Metab Syndr Relat Disord. 2009 Dec;7(6):537-42. doi: 10.1089/met.2009.0019.

Continuous positive airway pressure therapy improves hypoadiponectinemia in
severe obese men with obstructive sleep apnea without changes in insulin
resistance.

Carneiro G(1), Togeiro SM, Ribeiro-Filho FF, Truksinas E, Ribeiro AB, Zanella MT,
Tufik S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Universidade Federal de São
Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. glauciacarneiro@uol.com.br

BACKGROUND: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with several conditions
that could facilitate the onset of cardiovascular and metabolic dysfunctions.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy has been shown to improve
cardiovascular morbidity and mortality related to OSA, but the mechanisms
underlying this association are not fully understood.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to evaluate whether sleep apnea
contributes to insulin resistance and inflammatory marker alterations and to
evaluate the benefits of nasal CPAP therapy in severe obese patients with OSA.
METHODS: Plasma inflammatory cytokines and the homeostasis model assessment of
insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR, Insulin Sensitivity Index [ISI]) were measured
in severe obese male with OSA (n = 16) and compared with body mass index
(BMI)-matched male controls without OSA (n = 13). Seven patients with severe
sleep apnea (apnea-hypopnea index >30 events/h) were reevaluated after 3 months
of nasal CPAP therapy.
RESULTS: OSA patients had a significantly lower adiponectin levels than obese
controls (8.7 +/- 1.18 ng/mL vs. 15.0 +/- 2.55 ng/mL, P = 0.025). HOMA-IR, ISI,
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha, C-reactive protein (CRP), and
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels were not different between groups. Although insulin
resistance index and BMI values did not change after 3 months of nCPAP therapy,
adiponectin levels increased (P = 0.036) and the levels of TNF-alpha tended to
decrease (P = 0.065). Changes in adiponectin levels during nCPAP therapy were
positively correlated with an improvement in minimum oxygen saturation (r =
0.773; P = 0.041) and negatively correlated with changes in TNF-alpha levels (r =
-0.885; P = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: nCPAP therapy reverses hypoadiponectinemia levels present in obese
men with OSA, probably through reductions in hypoxia and inflammation activity.

PMID: 19558268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Arch Bronconeumol. 2009 Dec;45(12):577-84. doi: 10.1016/j.arbres.2009.05.002.
Epub 2009 Jun 23.

[Long term effect of autoadjusting positive airway pressure on C-reactive protein
and interleukin-6 in men with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Drummond M(1), Winck J, Guimarães J, Santos AC, Almeida J, Marques J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neumología, Hospital de João de Sao, Facultad de Medicina de
Porto, Oporto, Portugal. marta.drummond@gmail.com

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) has been increasingly
linked to cardiovascular disease. Inflammatory processes associated with OSA may 
contribute to this morbidity. Some studies have reported serum levels of high
sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) to be increased 
in these patients.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: investigate the impact of short and long-term autoadjusting
positive airway pressure (APAP) therapy on IL-6 and hs-CRP serum levels in
patients with moderate to severe obstructive sleep apnoea. Secundary Objective:
evaluate the basal hs-CRP and IL-6 levels in OSA patients and its possible
relation to OSA severity, independently of confounders and compare the hs-CRP
levels in OSA patients with those in community controls.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This is a prospective study including 98 male patients with
moderate to severe OSA confirmed by domiciliary sleep study. Malignancy and
chronic inflammatory diseases were exclusion criteria. hs-CRP and IL-6 serum
levels were evaluated before APAP, 9 days and 6 months after therapy. Community
controls (n=103) were selected using random digit dialing, and matched by age and
body mass index (BMI) for comparison of hs-CRP levels at baseline.
RESULTS: The studied population had a mean age of 55.3+/-10.7 years, mean BMI
33.2+/-5.0kg/m(2), mean apnoea-hypopnoea index 51.7+/-21.3/h and mean
desaturation index 86.3+/-5.3/h. The APAP compliance was good: 91.27%+/-20.45
days usage and 5.76+/-1.59h/night of usage. Mean basal hs-CRP and IL-6 serum
values were 0.52+/-0.53microg/l and 17.7+/-22.5microg/l, respectively. CRP levels
at baseline correlated significantly with apnoea-hypopnoea index, desaturation
index and minimum nocturnal oxygen saturation. IL-6 levels at baseline correlated
significantly and negatively with minimum nocturnal oxygen saturation. When
adjusting for confounding factors found in this study, all these relations lost
significance. CRP is significantly increased in patients when compared to
controls (p=0.002) and when considering hs-CRP cardiovascular risk stratified
categories, cases had significantly more patients at high risk of cardiovascular 
events than controls (p=0.002). After adjustment for BMI and arterial
hypertension, cases had an almost twofold moderate risk of cardiovascular events 
and more than a twofold severe risk of cardiovascular events when compared to
controls. We found no significant difference between hs-CRP and IL-6
concentrations pre-treatment and in two moments post-treatment (9 days and 6
months) (CRP: p=0.720 and p=0.387, respectively; IL-6: p=0.266 and p=0.238,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: OSA is associated with a low-grade inflammatory process; hs-CRP
serum levels are elevated in OSA patients when comparing to community controls,
independently of age and BMI and the former have a significantly higher risk of
cardiovascular events when compared to the latter. There was no significant
decrease of both inflammatory mediators (hs-CRP, IL-6) after short and long-term 
APAP therapy.

PMID: 19552994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. FASEB J. 2009 Oct;23(10):3629-36. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-122853. Epub 2009 Jun 22.

Enhancing influence of intranasal interleukin-6 on slow-wave activity and memory 
consolidation during sleep.

Benedict C(1), Scheller J, Rose-John S, Born J, Marshall L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
23538 Lübeck, Germany.

The cytokine IL-6 has been considered to exert neuromodulating influences on the 
brain, with promoting influences on sleep. Sleep enhances the consolidation of
memories, and, in particular, late nocturnal sleep also represents a period of
enhanced IL-6 signaling, due to a distinctly enhanced availability of soluble
IL-6 receptors during this period, enabling trans-signaling of IL-6 to neurons.
Thus, a contribution of IL-6 to sleep-dependent memory consolidation is
hypothesized. To test this hypothesis, we compared effects of intranasally
administered IL-6 (vs. placebo) on sleep-dependent consolidation of declarative
(neutral and emotional texts, 2-dimensional object location) and procedural
(finger sequence tapping) memories in 17 healthy young men. IL-6 distinctly
improved the sleep-related consolidation of emotional text material (P<0.03),
which benefits mostly from sleep in the second night-half, in which rapid eye
movement sleep (REM) dominates the non-REM-REM sleep cycle. During this second
night-half, the amount of electroencephalogram slow-wave activity (0.5-4 Hz)
distinctly increased after IL-6 (P<0.01). Other types of memory were not
affected. The ability of IL-6 to enhance sleep-associated emotional memory
consolidation highlights an example of a functional interaction between the
central nervous and immune system.

PMID: 19546306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2009 Nov;34(10):1486-94. doi:
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.05.002. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Cortisol awakening rise in middle-aged women in relation to psychological stress.

O'Connor DB(1), Hendrickx H, Dadd T, Elliman TD, Willis TA, Talbot D, Mayes AE,
Thethi K, Powell J, Dye L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
d.b.o'connor@leeds.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: The cortisol awakening rise (CAR) is defined as cortisol secretory
activity in the first 45-60 min immediately post-awakening. It has been suggested
that psychological factors may disrupt the normal awakening rise. Recent research
has shown that psychological stress may influence the magnitude of the CAR,
however the findings have been mixed. This study examined the impact of stress on
the CAR and the diurnal mean in a sample of middle-aged women.
METHOD: One hundred and eighteen healthy female participants who reported
experiencing high or low stress were recruited. Salivary cortisol levels were
measured immediately upon awakening (at 0, 15, 30, and 45 min) and at 3, 6, 9 and
12 h on two consecutive days. A number of metabolic and inflammatory biomarkers
were also assessed together with measures of mood disturbance and health
behaviour.
RESULTS: The magnitude of the CAR, assessed by the area under the response curve 
(AURC) estimate, was significantly lower in the high stress group compared to the
low stress group indicating that participants who experienced high stress
secreted lower levels of cortisol. The effect was largely accounted for by
differences 30 min after waking. The diurnal mean was also lower for the high
stress group. Although participants in the high stress group had a slightly worse
inflammatory profile, only low-density lipoprotein levels were found to be
significantly higher, compared to the low stress group. Lifestyle indicators and 
mood were also found to be significantly poorer in the high stress group.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that psychological stress may be associated with
a smaller cortisol awakening rise, a lower diurnal mean, poor lifestyle choices
and high levels of psychological distress. These findings may have broader
implications for future health risk and for an individual's ability to cope with 
imminent daily stressors and demands.

PMID: 19520518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Brain Behav Immun. 2010 Jan;24(1):54-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2009.06.001. Epub 2009
Jun 9.

Sleep loss activates cellular markers of inflammation: sex differences.

Irwin MR(1), Carrillo C, Olmstead R.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles - Cousins Center for
Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-7076, USA. mirwin1@ucla.edu

Sleep disturbance is associated with inflammation and related disorders including
cardiovascular disease, arthritis, and diabetes mellitus. Given sex differences
in the prevalence of inflammatory disorders with stronger associations in
females, this study was undertaken to test the effects of sleep loss on cellular 
mechanisms that contribute to proinflammatory cytokine activity. In 26 healthy
adults (11 females; 15 males), monocyte intracellular proinflammatory cytokine
production was repeatedly assessed at 08:00, 12:00, 16:00, 20:00, and 23:00h
during a baseline period and after partial sleep deprivation (awake from 23:00 to
3.00h). In the morning after a night of sleep loss, monocyte production of
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) differentially
changed between the two sexes. Whereas both females and males showed a marked
increase in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) - stimulated production of IL-6 and
TNF-alpha in the morning immediately after PSD, production of these cytokines
during the early- and late evening was increased in the females as compared to
decreases in the males. Sleep loss induces a functional alteration of monocyte
proinflammatory cytokine responses with females showing greater cellular immune
activation as compared to changes in males. These results have implications for
understanding the role of sleep disturbance in the differential risk profile for 
inflammatory disorders between the sexes.

PMCID: PMC2787978
PMID: 19520155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Int J Biometeorol. 2009 Nov;53(6):479-85. doi: 10.1007/s00484-009-0236-1. Epub
2009 Jun 9.

Seasonal variation in blood concentrations of interleukin-6, adrenocorticotrophic
hormone, metabolites of catecholamine and cortisol in healthy volunteers.

Kanikowska D(1), Sugenoya J, Sato M, Shimizu Y, Inukai Y, Nishimura N, Iwase S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan. dkanikowska@hotmail.com

We investigated seasonal changes in blood concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6),
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), metabolites of catecholamine (VMA, HVA, and 
5-HIAA) and cortisol in humans. Eight volunteers were investigated at four times 
during the year (February, May, August and October) at latitude 35 degrees N. The
mean ambient temperature at the collection periods was higher in the order of
summer > autumn approximately spring > winter. Changes in mood were also
monitored by a profile of mood states (POMS) questionnaire. The concentration of 
IL-6 was significantly higher in winter and summer than in spring and autumn. The
concentrations of ACTH, HVA and VMA were significantly higher in summer. No
seasonal variation was detected in cortisol. There were significant differences
among the seasons in subscale tension and anger in the POMS questionnaire; the
tension subscale showed significant differences between spring and autumn, with a
higher score in spring. The results demonstrate that Il-6, ACTH, HVA and VMA
exhibit statistically significant seasonal rhythms, which might have important
diagnostic and therapeutic implications.

PMID: 19506914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Eur J Neurosci. 2009 May;29(9):1754-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.06721.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 28.

Functional and structural brain alterations in insomnia: implications for
pathophysiology.

Riemann D(1), Kloepfer C, Berger M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Freiburg University Medical
Center, Freiburg, Germany. dieter.riemann@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Insomnia is defined as the complaint of not being able to fall asleep or to
maintain sleep, and/or nonrestorative sleep, accompanied by impaired daytime
functioning on a social, emotional or professional level. Insomnia per se is a
very frequent complaint and can be caused by environmental, medical, mental or
psychosocial factors or the intake of drugs. Primary insomnia is an insomnia
subtype characterized by the absence of a causative medical or psychiatric
factor. From a pathophysiological point of view, persistent hyperarousal on
autonomous, emotional, cognitive or neurobiological levels is thought to be the
decisive factor for the development and persistence of chronic primary insomnia. 
This view is supported by studies confirming that patients with primary insomnia 
display heightened levels of fast frequencies of the sleep EEG, show increased
production of cortisol and interleukin-6, and demonstrate increased metabolism in
several brain areas during sleep (as measured by positron emission tomography).
Furthermore, primary insomnia is coupled with cognitive deficits during waking
and with impairments of nocturnal memory consolidation. Just recently, reductions
in hippocampal volume size have been reported in patients suffering from primary 
insomnia. In the light of neurobiological theories of sleep-wake regulation,
primary insomnia may be conceptualised as the final common pathway of the
interaction of a genetic vulnerability to an imbalance between arousing and
sleep-inducing brain centres (which is triggered by psychosocial and/or medical
stressors) with perpetuating mechanisms such as maladaptive behaviours, learned
sleep-preventing associations and cognitive factors.

PMID: 19473230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Clin Cardiol. 2009 May;32(5):288. doi: 10.1002/clc.20464.

Clinical implications of elevated serum interleukin-6, soluble CD40 ligand,
metalloproteinase-9, and tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1 in patients with
acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction.

Dominguez-Rodriguez A, Abreu-Gonzalez P.

Comment on
    Clin Cardiol. 2008 Sep;31(9):413-8.

PMID: 19452490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 20;27(18):2909-15. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.18.7435. Epub
2009 May 11.

Biologic cost of caring for a cancer patient: dysregulation of pro- and
anti-inflammatory signaling pathways.

Rohleder N(1), Marin TJ, Ma R, Miller GE.

Author information: 
(1)Brandeis University, Department of Psychology, Waltham, MA 02454, USA.
rohleder@brandeis.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 20;27(18):2894-5.

PURPOSE: Caring for a family member with cancer is a psychologically demanding
experience. However, it remains unclear whether the distress that caregiving
provokes also takes a physiologic toll on the body. This study observed familial 
caregivers of patients with brain cancer for a year after diagnosis and tracked
changes in neurohormonal and inflammatory processes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighteen caregivers (age 50.4 +/- 3.5 years) and 19
controls (age 50.2 +/- 2.6 years) were assessed four times during a year (before 
and after radiotherapy, as well as 6 weeks and 4 months thereafter). Salivary
biomarkers of hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and sympathetic nervous system 
(SNS) activity were collected, and blood was drawn for assessment of the systemic
inflammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). Blood was
also used to monitor in vitro IL-6 production by endotoxin-stimulated leukocytes 
and expression of mRNA for pro- and anti-inflammatory signaling molecules.
RESULTS: Caregivers showed marked changes over time in diurnal output of salivary
amylase, a marker of SNS activity, whereas secretions in controls were stable
during follow-up. Cortisol output was similar in caregivers and controls. During 
the year, caregivers showed a profound linear increase in systemic inflammation, 
as indexed by CRP. At the same time, they displayed a linear decline in mRNA for 
anti-inflammatory signaling molecules and diminished in vitro glucocorticoid
sensitivity.
CONCLUSION: These preliminary data show that familial caregivers of patients with
cancer experience marked changes in neurohormonal and inflammatory processes in
the year after diagnosis. These changes may place them at risk for morbidity and 
mortality from diseases fostered by excessive inflammation.

PMID: 19433690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Sleep. 2009 Apr;32(4):537-43.

Long-term effect of continuous positive airway pressure therapy on inflammation
markers of patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.

Steiropoulos P(1), Kotsianidis I, Nena E, Tsara V, Gounari E, Hatzizisi O,
Kyriazis G, Christaki P, Froudarakis M, Bouros D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pneumonology, Medical School of Alexandroupolis, Democritus
University of Thrace, Greece. pstirop@med.duth.gr

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Several lines of evidence suggest immune system derangement in 
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) patients. However, no data exist on the
long-term effect of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) treatment on
systemic immunity. Hence, we sought to evaluate this effect on various
immunological parameters in OSAS patients.
DESIGN: Prospective case series.
SETTING: Sleep unit of a general hospital.
PATIENTS: Newly-diagnosed, nonsmoking, otherwise healthy OSAS male patients (n = 
52) were evaluated on diagnosis and 6 months after CPAP treatment. According to
compliance to CPAP use at 6-month follow-up, they were divided into 2 groups:
group A (n = 32): good compliance (mean CPAP use > or = 4 h/night); and group B
(n = 20): poor compliance (mean CPAP use < 4 h/night).
INTERVENTIONS: N/A.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Blood samples were obtained at baseline and at the
6-month follow-up. Percentage and absolute count of lymphocyte subsets (by flow
cytometry), serum TNF-alpha, IL-6, and uric acid levels were measured. No
differences were recorded regarding the baseline anthropometric or sleep
characteristics of the 2 groups. In group A, a significant decrease in the
absolute count of total lymphocytes (P = 0.003), and of CD4+ cells (P = 0.001),
and a decrease in TNF-alpha levels (P = 0.001) and uric acid levels (P < 0.001)
was observed after CPAP application. On the contrary, no alterations occurred in 
any of the tested parameters in group B patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The selective reduction of soluble and cellular immune response
factors only in those OSAS patients who exhibited good compliance to CPAP therapy
provides further evidence for an ongoing systemic immune process in OSAS.

PMCID: PMC2663658
PMID: 19413148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Oct;118(4):519-30. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0535-y. Epub
2009 Apr 26.

Interleukin-6 and the serotonergic system of the medulla oblongata in the sudden 
infant death syndrome.

Rognum IJ(1), Haynes RL, Vege A, Yang M, Rognum TO, Kinney HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. ingvarjo@stud.ntnu.no

Mild infection may trigger sudden death in the vulnerable infant by cytokine
interactions with a compromised medullary serotonergic (5-HT) system, leading to 
disrupted cardiorespiratory regulation and sleep-related sudden death. The
cytokine interleukin (IL)-6 is elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid in SIDS. We
tested the hypothesis that the expression of IL-6 receptors (IL-6R) and/or gp130 
(involved in IL-6R signaling) is altered in the medullary 5-HT system in SIDS.
Immunohistochemistry of IL-6R and gp130 was performed on medullae from 25 SIDS
infants, 20 infectious deaths, and 14 controls using a semi-quantitative grading 
system. In the SIDS cases, mean IL-6R intensity grade in the arcuate nucleus
(major component of medullary 5-HT system) was significantly higher than in the
control group (2.00 +/- 0.07 vs. 1.77 +/- 0.08, P = 0.04), with no other
differences in IL-6R or gp130 expression at any other site. Arcuate 5-HT neurons 
expressed IL-6R, indicating a site of IL-6/5-HT interaction. In SIDS, IL-6R
expression is abnormal in the arcuate nucleus, the putative human homolog of
rodent ventral medullary chemosensitivity sites involving 5-HT. Aberrant
interactions between IL-6 and the arcuate nucleus may contribute to impaired
responses to hypercapnia generated by infection (hyper-metabolism) combined with 
rebreathing.

PMCID: PMC3271725
PMID: 19396608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Eur J Pharmacol. 2009 Jun 24;613(1-3):141-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2009.04.023.
Epub 2009 Apr 19.

IL-6-trans-signalling increases rapid-eye-movement sleep in rats.

May U(1), Schiffelholz T, Baier PC, Krueger JM, Rose-John S, Scheller J.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemisches Institut, Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel, Kiel,
Germany.

Interleukin 6 (IL-6), a cytokine of the gp130-signalling-family, plays an
important role in immediate immunological functions, in metabolism and in the
central nervous system. IL-6-signalling is mediated by classic-signalling via the
membrane bound IL-6 receptor or by IL-6-trans-signalling via the soluble IL-6
receptor. Whereas the receptor subunit gp130 is ubiquitously expressed within the
body, IL-6 receptor expression is restricted to distinct cell populations. Within
the brain parenchyma the IL-6 receptor is sparsely expressed, and therefore the
brain is mostly dependent on IL-6-trans-signalling in its response to IL-6.
Recently we have shown that IL-6-trans-signalling but not classic-signalling
plays a pivotal role in the establishment and maintenance of chronic inflammation
and cancer, whereas its role in sleep regulation has not been studied so far. We 
reasoned that the IL-6-trans-signalling mimetic Hyper-IL-6 which in contrast to
IL-6 alone can activate almost all cells of the brain might have a profound
effect on sleep regulation and performed sleep recordings with rats injected with
recombinant Hyper-IL-6. In the present study, the i.c.v. administration of the
designer cytokine Hyper-IL-6 into rats at dark onset increased the amount of
rapid-eye-movement sleep (REM sleep) but did not affect non-rapid-eye-movement
sleep (non-REM sleep). Our data define a new role of IL-6-trans-signalling in
sleep regulation.

PMID: 19383497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Apr;23(4):485-93.

Genetic variants in interleukin-6 modified risk of obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome.

Zhang X(1), Liu RY, Lei Z, Zhu Y, Huang JA, Jiang X, Liu Z, Liu X, Peng X, Hu H, 
Zhang HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital, Medical
College of Soochow University, Suzhou, PR China.

Obesity and inflammation are known to correlate with the pathogenesis of
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Interleukin (IL)-6, an important
regulator of obesity and inflammation, was reported to phenotypically increase in
patients with OSAS. This study aimed to investigate whether genetic variants in
IL-6 confer susceptibility to OSAS. The study population consisted of 151
patients with OSAS and 75 healthy controls from Southeast China. Five
haplotype-tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) were selected across 21
kb of the IL-6 locus using Haploview software V4.1. The tSNPs were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and genotyped by restriction enzyme digestion
followed by gel electrophoresis. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) and haplotype
reconstruction were carried out by means of a SHEsis program. No distribution
difference of any of the five tSNPs between OSAS patients and controls was
observed. However, in non-obese individuals (n=117), the minor allele G
(rs1800796) decreased risk of OSAS compared with the major allele C [odds ratio
(OR), 0.48; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.26-0.86; p=0.014], and the haplotype 
TG (rs1880242, rs1800796) conferred a significantly decreased risk of OSAS than
single allele G (rs1800796) (OR, 0.39; 95% CI, 0.20-0.74; p=0.003). Moreover, the
severity of sleep-disordered breathing (measured by apnea hypopnea index)
increased linearly in carriers of the C variant of IL-6 -572G/C polymorphism
(14.3+/-5.1, 22.0+/-3.6 and 34.8+/-3.5 for GG, CG and CC, respectively; p=0.012).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to suggest that genetic
variants in IL-6 could modify OSAS susceptibility. SNP genotyping of IL-6 is a
potential strategy for detecting the risk of breathing disordered diseases in
non-obese individuals.

PMID: 19288024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Mar-Apr;51(5):392-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2008.10.005.

Obstructive sleep apnea and inflammation.

McNicholas WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research Laboratory, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
walter.mcnicholas@ucd.ie

The pathogenesis of cardiovascular complications in obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome (OSAS) is not fully understood but is likely multifactorial in origin.
Inflammatory processes play an important role in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis, and circulating levels of several markers of inflammation have
been associated with future cardiovascular risk. These include cell adhesion
molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and selectins, cytokines such
as tumour necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 6, chemokines such as interleukin
8, and C-reactive protein. There is also increasing evidence that inflammatory
processes play an important role in the cardiovascular pathophysiology of OSAS
and many of the inflammatory markers associated with cardiovascular risk have
been reported as elevated in patients with OSAS. Furthermore, animal and cell
culture studies have demonstrated preferential activation of inflammatory
pathways by intermittent hypoxia, which is an integral feature of OSAS. The
precise role of inflammation in the development of cardiovascular disease in OSAS
requires further study, particularly the relationship with oxidative stress,
metabolic dysfunction, and obesity.

PMID: 19249445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2008 Dec;59 Suppl 6:607-14.

Frequency of distribution of inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-alpha gene
polymorphism in patients with obstructive sleep apnea.

Popko K(1), Gorska E, Potapinska O, Wasik M, Stoklosa A, Plywaczewski R,
Winiarska M, Gorecka D, Sliwinski P, Popko M, Szwed T, Demkow U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Clinical Immunology of Developmental
Age, Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland. aksiak@interia.pl

Obesity is one of the most commonly identified factors for the obstructive sleep 
apnea syndrome (OSAS). Adipose tissue is the source of many cytokines, among them
there are IL-6, IL-1, and TNF-alpha. The level of inflammatory cytokines
increases in people with OSAS and obesity. The aim of this study was to evaluate 
the distribution of genotypes in inflammatory cytokine genes in people with
obesity-related OSAS. The examined group consisted of 102 person with obesity
related-OSAS and 77 normal weight person without OSAS. Genotyping of DNA sequence
variation was carried out by restriction enzyme (IL-1: Taq I, IL-6: Lwe I,
TNF-alpha: Nco I) analysis of PCR amplified DNA. The study revealed a significant
correlation between polymorphism located in the promoter region of inflammatory
cytokine genes and obesity-related OSAS.

PMID: 19218687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004589. Epub 2009 Feb 25.

Sleep restriction increases the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases by
augmenting proinflammatory responses through IL-17 and CRP.

van Leeuwen WM(1), Lehto M, Karisola P, Lindholm H, Luukkonen R, Sallinen M,
Härmä M, Porkka-Heiskanen T, Alenius H.

Author information: 
(1)Brain and Work Research Centre, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health,
Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Sleep restriction, leading to deprivation of sleep, is common in
modern 24-h societies and is associated with the development of health problems
including cardiovascular diseases. Our objective was to investigate the
immunological effects of prolonged sleep restriction and subsequent recovery
sleep, by simulating a working week and following recovery weekend in a
laboratory environment.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: After 2 baseline nights of 8 hours time in bed (TIB), 13
healthy young men had only 4 hours TIB per night for 5 nights, followed by 2
recovery nights with 8 hours TIB. 6 control subjects had 8 hours TIB per night
throughout the experiment. Heart rate, blood pressure, salivary cortisol and
serum C-reactive protein (CRP) were measured after the baseline (BL), sleep
restriction (SR) and recovery (REC) period. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) were collected at these time points, counted and stimulated with PHA. Cell
proliferation was analyzed by thymidine incorporation and cytokine production by 
ELISA and RT-PCR. CRP was increased after SR (145% of BL; p<0.05), and continued 
to increase after REC (231% of BL; p<0.05). Heart rate was increased after REC
(108% of BL; p<0.05). The amount of circulating NK-cells decreased (65% of BL;
p<0.005) and the amount of B-cells increased (121% of BL; p<0.005) after SR, but 
these cell numbers recovered almost completely during REC. Proliferation of
stimulated PBMC increased after SR (233% of BL; p<0.05), accompanied by increased
production of IL-1beta (137% of BL; p<0.05), IL-6 (163% of BL; p<0.05) and IL-17 
(138% of BL; p<0.05) at mRNA level. After REC, IL-17 was still increased at the
protein level (119% of BL; p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: 5 nights of sleep restriction increased lymphocyte activation and
the production of proinflammatory cytokines including IL-1beta IL-6 and IL-17;
they remained elevated after 2 nights of recovery sleep, accompanied by increased
heart rate and serum CRP, 2 important risk factors for cardiovascular diseases.
Therefore, long-term sleep restriction may lead to persistent changes in the
immune system and the increased production of IL-17 together with CRP may
increase the risk of developing cardiovascular diseases.

PMCID: PMC2643002
PMID: 19240794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Sleep. 2009 Feb;32(2):200-4.

Sleep duration and biomarkers of inflammation.

Patel SR(1), Zhu X, Storfer-Isser A, Mehra R, Jenny NS, Tracy R, Redline S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, University Hospital
Case Medical Center and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, USA.
srp20@case.edu

INTRODUCTION: Extremes of sleep duration have been associated with adverse health
outcomes. The mechanism is unclear but may be related to increased inflammation. 
We sought to assess the association between sleep duration and inflammatory
biomarkers.
METHODS: A total of 614 individuals from the Cleveland Family Study completed
questionnaires about sleep habits and underwent polysomnography. A morning
fasting blood sample was assayed for 5 inflammatory cytokines.
RESULTS: In this cohort, mean (SD) habitual sleep duration based on self-report
was 7.6 (1.6) h and mean sleep duration by polysomnography (PSG) on the night
prior to blood sampling was 6.2 (1.3) h. After adjusting for obesity and apnea
severity, each additional hour of habitual sleep duration was associated with an 
8% increase in C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (P=0.004) and 7% increase in
interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels (P=0.0003). These associations were independent of
self-reported sleepiness. In contrast, PSG sleep duration was inversely
associated with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) levels. For each hour
reduction in sleep, TNFalpha levels increased by 8% on average (P=0.02). Sleep
duration was not associated with IL-1 or IL-10.
CONCLUSIONS: Increases in habitual sleep durations are associated with elevations
in CRP and IL-6 while reduced PSG sleep duration is associated with elevated TNFa
levels. Activation of pro-inflammatory pathways may represent a mechanism by
which extreme sleep habits affect health.

PMCID: PMC2635584
PMID: 19238807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Kidney Int. 2009 May;75(9):976-81. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.21. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Plasma hepcidin levels are elevated but responsive to erythropoietin therapy in
renal disease.

Ashby DR(1), Gale DP, Busbridge M, Murphy KG, Duncan ND, Cairns TD, Taube DH,
Bloom SR, Tam FW, Chapman RS, Maxwell PH, Choi P.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, Hammersmith Hospital,
Imperial College London, London, UK. d.ashby@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2009 Nov;76(10):1116; author reply 1116.
    Kidney Int. 2009 Sep;76(6):680; author reply 680-1.
    Kidney Int. 2009 Oct;76(8):912; author reply 912-3.
    Kidney Int. 2009 May;75(9):873-4.

Hepcidin is a critical inhibitor of iron export from macrophages, enterocytes,
and hepatocytes. Given that it is filtered and degraded by the kidney, its
elevated levels in renal failure have been suggested to play a role in the
disordered iron metabolism of uremia, including erythropoietin resistance. Here, 
we used a novel radioimmunoassay for hepcidin-25, the active form of the hormone,
to measure its levels in renal disease. There was a significant diurnal variation
of hepcidin and a strong correlation to ferritin levels in normal volunteers. In 
44 patients with mild to moderate kidney disease, hepcidin levels were
significantly elevated, positively correlated with ferritin but inversely
correlated with the estimated glomerular filtration rate. In 94 stable
hemodialysis patients, hepcidin levels were also significantly elevated, but this
did not correlate with interleukin-6 levels, suggesting that increased hepcidin
was not due to a general inflammatory state. Elevated hepcidin was associated
with anemia, but, intriguingly, the erythropoietin dose was negatively correlated
with hepcidin, suggesting that erythropoietin suppresses hepcidin levels. This
was confirmed in 7 patients when hepcidin levels significantly decreased after
initiation of erythropoietin treatment. Our results show that hepcidin is
elevated in renal disease and suggest that higher hepcidin levels do not predict 
increased erythropoietin requirements.

PMID: 19212416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Clin Rheumatol. 2009 Apr;28(4):475-8. doi: 10.1007/s10067-009-1094-2. Epub 2009
Jan 27.

Evaluating obesity in fibromyalgia: neuroendocrine biomarkers, symptoms, and
functions.

Okifuji A(1), Bradshaw DH, Olson C.

Author information: 
(1)Pain Research and Management Center, Department of Anesthesiology, University 
of Utah, 615 Arapeen Drive, Suite 200, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.
akiko.okifuji@hsc.utah.edu

The aim of this study was to investigate the associations between obesity and
fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS). This study was conducted at the University of Utah
Pain Management and Research Center, Salt Lake City, Utah. Thirty-eight FMS
patients were included in this study. Neuroendocrine indices (catecholamines,
cortisol, C-reactive protein [CRP], and interleukin-6), symptom measures
(Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire), sleep indices (Actigraph), and physical
functioning (treadmill testing) were measured. Body mass index (BMI) provided the
primary indicator of obesity. Approximately 50% of the patients were obese and an
additional 21% were overweight. Strong positive associations were found between
BMI and levels of IL-6 (r=0.52) and epinephrine (r=0.54), and somewhat weaker
associations with cortisol (r=0.32) and CRP (r=0.37). BMI was also related to
maximal heart rate (r=0.33) and inversely related to distance walked (r= -0.41). 
BMI was associated with disturbed sleep: total sleep time (r= -0.56) and sleep
efficiency (r= -0.44). No associations between self-reported symptoms and BMI
were found. This study provides preliminary evidence suggesting that obesity
plays a role in FMS-related dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC2668698
PMID: 19172342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2009 Jan;7(1):76-81.

Inflammatory cardiovascular risk markers in obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.

Ryan S(1), McNicholas WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, St. Vincent's University Hospital, Elm
Park, Dublin 4, Ireland.

Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) represents a highly prevalent disease
and is recognized as a major public health burden. Large-scale epidemiological
studies have demonstrated an independent relationship between OSAS and various
cardiovascular disorders. The pathogenesis of cardiovascular complications in
OSAS is not completely understood, but given the complexity of the disorder, a
multifactorial etiology is likely. Inflammatory processes have emerged as
critical in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis in general and they mediate many 
of the stages of atheroma formation. Circulating levels of several markers of
inflammation have been associated with future cardiovascular risk. These markers 
include cell adhesion molecules such as intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1) and selectins, cytokines such as tumour necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha) and interleukin 6 (IL-6), chemokines such as IL-8, and C-reactive
protein (CRP). There is increasing evidence that inflammatory processes also play
a central role in the cardiovascular pathophysiology of OSAS. This is supported
by cell culture and animal studies identifying a preferential activation of
inflammatory pathways by intermittent hypoxia (IH), the hallmark of OSAS. A
number of studies have selectively examined the expression of inflammatory
factors in OSAS patients with different conclusions. These different findings may
have been contributed to by a number of methodological factors such as small
subject numbers, inadequately matched study populations, particularly in terms of
body mass index (BMI), and inclusion of patients with pre-existing cardiovascular
or metabolic diseases. This review will focus on the potential role of various
inflammatory markers in OSAS with a critical analysis of the current literature.

PMID: 19149546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Ther Adv Respir Dis. 2008 Apr;2(2):55-64. doi: 10.1177/1753465808088902.

Exhaled nitric oxide, systemic inflammation, and the spirometric response to
inhaled fluticasone propionate in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
prospective study.

Kunisaki KM(1), Rice KL, Janoff EN, Rector TS, Niewoehner DE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep, University of
Minnesota, USA. kunis001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: A subset of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) may respond more favorably to inhaled corticosteroids (ICS), but no simple
method is currently utilized to predict the presence or absence of ICS responses 
in patients with COPD.We evaluated the ability of exhaled nitric oxide (FENO) and
serum inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein [CRP], interleukin-6 [IL-6], and
interleukin-8 [IL-8]) to independently predict spirometric responses to ICS in
patients with COPD.
METHODS: Among 60 ex-smokers with severe COPD (mean FEV1 1.07 L, 36% of
predicted), we conducted a single-arm, open-label study. Participants spent four 
weeks free of any ICS, followed by four weeks of ICS use (fluticasone propionate 
500 mcg twice daily). FENO, CRP, IL-6, IL-8, and pre-bronchodilator spirometry
were measured immediately before and after the four weeks of ICS use.
RESULTS: Baseline FENO, CRP, IL-6, and IL-8 showed no correlations to FEV1
responses to ICS. ICS responders (increase in FEV1 > or = 200 mL after four weeks
of ICS) did have significantly higher baseline FENO levels compared with
non-responders (46.5 parts per billion [ppb] vs. 25 ppb, p = 0.028). The receiver
operating characteristic curve for FENO to discriminate responders from
non-responders had an area under curve of 0.72. Baseline serum inflammatory
markers did not differ between responders and non-responders.
CONCLUSION: In ex-smokers with severe COPD, a measure of local pulmonary
inflammation, FENO, may be more closely associated with FEV1 responses to four
weeks of ICS than are standard markers of systemic inflammation, serum CRP, IL-6,
and IL-8.

PMID: 19124359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2009 Jan-Feb;51(4):294-302. doi: 10.1016/j.pcad.2008.10.003.

Cardiovascular, inflammatory, and metabolic consequences of sleep deprivation.

Mullington JM(1), Haack M, Toth M, Serrador JM, Meier-Ewert HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School; Division of Cardiology, Boston Medical Center, Boston University School
of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. mulling@bidmc.harvard.edu

That insufficient sleep is associated with poor attention and performance
deficits is becoming widely recognized. Fewer people are aware that chronic sleep
complaints in epidemiologic studies have also been associated with an increase in
overall mortality and morbidity. This article summarizes findings of known
effects of insufficient sleep on cardiovascular risk factors including blood
pressure, glucose metabolism, hormonal regulation, and inflammation with
particular emphasis on experimental sleep loss, using models of total and partial
sleep deprivation, in healthy individuals who normally sleep in the range of 7 to
8 hours and have no sleep disorders. These studies show that insufficient sleep
alters established cardiovascular risk factors in a direction that is known to
increase the risk of cardiac morbidity.

PMCID: PMC3403737
PMID: 19110131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2009 Jun;117(6):283-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1085996.
Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Nutritional composition in different training stages in young female athletes
(swimming) and association with leptin, IGF-1 and estradiol.

Zietz B(1), Schnabl S, Nerlich M, Schoelmerich J, Schaeffler A.

Author information: 
(1)Internal Medicine II, Goldbergklink, Kelheim, Germany. b-zietz@t-online.de

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the interaction of serum leptin, IGF-1, estradiol and 
cortisol in salvia as well as IL-6 with nutritional composition in female
athletes (swimming) according to the training protocol (competition (C), sprint
(S), recreation (R), endurance (E)).
DESIGN/METHODS: In 23 young (10-19 years old) female athletes (Bavarian swimming 
competition) in different training stages nutritional protocols were evaluated
using standardized questionnaires. Body composition was measured by using
analysis of bioimpedance. Estradiol, IGF-1, leptin and IL-6 in serum were
measured by ELISA. To obtain circadian profiles of cortisol salvia probes were
sampled at 4 h intervals and cortisol in saliva was measured.
RESULTS: Daily intake of kilocalories varied significantly and was highest during
R with the highest percentage of nutritional fat intake (37.3%) when compared to 
C (28.1%, p=0.001). BMI was associated with leptin in all training stages and
IL-6 in R, C and E. Leptin, IGF-1 and cortisol in salvia were dependent on
training stages while serum levels of estradiol were not. Nutritional fat intake 
(p=0.07 in R) as well as serum levels of IGF-1 (p=0.014 in E) were significantly 
associated with estradiol but not with serum leptin levels or salivary cortisol.
CONCLUSIONS: In female athletes nutritional composition has an impact on serum
hormones (leptin, IGF-1 as well as estradiol) and may be also on cytokines
(IL-6). Leptin, IGF-1 and salivary cortisol levels represent the intensity of
physical training and possibly overtraining. In our female athletes no findings
indicative of female athlete triad could be demonstrated.

PMID: 19085695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2009;47(1):20-5. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2009.005.

Relationships between C-reactive protein concentration and genotype in healthy
volunteers.

Jones J(1), Chen LS, Baudhuin L, Peterson S, Harmsen WS, Zinsmeister AR,
McConnell J, Sandborn WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,
Saskatchewan, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms of the gene for C-reactive protein (CRP) alter baseline
serum CRP concentrations. The impact of polymorphisms of the CRP gene (genotype) 
on the normal range for CRP concentrations (phenotype) has not been determined.
This study evaluated the median serum CRP concentrations in normal subjects
stratified for CRP genotype, after adjustment for relevant covariates as well as 
polymorphisms in tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin 6 (IL-6)
genotypes.
METHODS: A total of 423 healthy adults without infectious or inflammatory
conditions undergoing phlebotomy for laboratory testing were enrolled in the
study. Assays for serum high sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP), IL-6, and TNF-alpha
genotypes were measured.
RESULTS: The median hs-CRP concentration was 0.96 mg/L (range <0.1-40.15 mg/L).
The CRP 1444 C/T heterozygote and homozygote genotype was associated with a
significantly higher hs-CRP concentration (p<0.05), even after multivariate
analysis controlling for age, gender, body mass index, hypertension, dyslipidemia
and obstructive sleep apnea. The CRP 286 C/T/A heterozygote genotype was
significant (p<0.05) in the multi-variable analysis, univariately was borderline 
significant (p=0.052).
CONCLUSIONS: Selected genetic polymorphisms of the CRP gene are independently
associated with higher basal hs-CRP concentrations in healthy adults. Larger
studies are needed to perform haplotype analyses and to adequately evaluate the
relationship between hs-CRP and genetic polymorphisms with lower allelic
frequencies.

PMID: 19072030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Clin Invest Med. 2008 Dec 1;31(6):E386-90.

Influence of obesity on the prevalence and clinical features of asthma.

Boulet LP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Pneumologie, Hôpital Laval,Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et 
dePneumologie de l'Université Laval. lpboulet@med.ulaval.ca

Obesity has been associated with an increased prevalence of asthma and poorer
control of this disease. However, the mechanisms by which obesity can influence
airway function and make asthma more difficult to control remain uncertain. The
physiological changes associated with obesity can contribute to respiratory
symptoms and these should be differentiated from those caused by asthma. Obesity 
can possibly influence the development of asthma through genetic, developmental, 
hormonal, neurogenic or mechanical influences. Breathing at low lung volumes and 
changes in the pattern of breathing in obese subjects may alter airway smooth
muscle plasticity and airway function. The release by adipocytes of various
cytokines and mediators such as Interleukin-6, TNF-alpha, eotaxin, and leptin,
and the reduction of anti-inflammatory adipokines in obese subjects may possibly 
contribute to the development or increased clinical expression of asthma in
promoting airway inflammation. Reduced asthma control and impaired response to
asthma therapy have been reported in obese patients. Obesity-related
co-morbidities such as Sleep Apnea and Gastro-esophageal reflux may also
contribute to this poor control. Weight loss improves asthma control and reduces 
medication needs. Research is needed to better define the optimal management of
obese asthmatic patients.

PMID: 19032910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2008 Sep-Oct;26(5):969.

Diurnal rhythm of cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis may be reflected in in vitro 
cultures of collected mononuclear cells.

Johannsdottir K, Gudbjornsson B.

PMID: 19032841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Respiration. 2008;76(4):375-6. doi: 10.1159/000158547. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Inflammation and obstructive sleep apnea: thinking outside of the fat.

Patel AD, Cohen Z.

Comment on
    Respiration. 2008;76(4):377-85.

PMID: 19018163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Brain Behav Immun. 2009 Mar;23(3):351-4. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2008.10.008. Epub
2008 Oct 26.

Disturbed sleep is associated with increased C-reactive protein in young women.

Okun ML(1), Coussons-Read M, Hall M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 3811
O'Hara Street, Room E-1116, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. okunml@upmc.edu

Evidence links disturbed sleep with an exaggerated inflammatory response and
increased risk of adverse health outcomes. An emerging risk factor for many
adverse health outcomes is chronic, low-grade inflammation. An exaggerated
inflammatory response could provide a biological link between disturbed sleep and
adverse health outcomes. The relationship between sleep and chronic, low-grade
inflammation has been sparsely examined in otherwise healthy, young women. We
evaluated cross-sectional relationships between self-reported sleep and three
inflammatory markers. Participants were community dwelling nonpregnant women
(N=43, 28.2+/-5.2 years of age). Measures included the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality
Index (PSQI), sleep diaries, and serum levels of IL-6, TNF-alpha and C-reactive
protein. Poor sleep quality and continuity were associated with higher CRP levels
after controlling for covariates. No significant relationships were observed
between PSQI scores and IL-6 or TNF-alpha; sleep duration was not related to any 
of the inflammatory markers. Poor sleep, in young adulthood, may contribute to
the chronic, low-grade inflammation associated with an increased risk for future 
adverse health outcomes. Future work should longitudinally evaluate how these
relationships may affect development of gender-specific diseases in apparently
healthy young women.

PMCID: PMC2909667
PMID: 19007876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Sleep Med. 2009 Aug;10(7):720-5. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2008.07.010. Epub 2008 Oct 
25.

Post- to pre-overnight sleep systolic blood pressures are associated with sleep
respiratory disturbance, pro-inflammatory state and metabolic situation in
patients with sleep-disordered breathing.

Ting H(1), Lo HS, Chang SY, Chung AH, Kuan PC, Yuan SC, Huang CN, Lee SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Chung-Shan Medical
University Hospital, Chung-Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the current study was to investigate whether changes in
post- to pre-overnight sleep systolic blood pressure (SSBP) are associated with
sleep respiratory disturbance, pro-inflammatory state, and metabolic situation in
patients with sleep-disordered breathing (SDB).
METHODS: Anthropometry, sleep polysomnography, biochemical markers, and pre- and 
post-overnight sleep BP were measured from 263 SDB patients. All SDB patients
were further subgrouped into MORNING SURGE (% changes from post- to pre-overnight
SSBP >+1SD of this cohort), MORNING DROP (% changes <-1SD), CONSTANT HIGH (%
changes within+/-1SD, averaged SSBP>130mmHg) and CONSTANT LOW (% changes
within+/-1SD, averaged SSBP<130mmHg).
RESULTS: BMI, neck circumference, waistline circumference, respiratory
disturbance index, arousal index, lowest oxygen saturation, duration of
SaO(2)<90%, blood glucose, hs-CRP, and metabolic syndrome score in MORNING SURGE 
and CONSTANT HIGH were significantly greater than those in CONSTANT LOW. Except
metabolic syndrome score, all other parameters in MORNING DROP were similar to
those in CONSTANT LOW.
CONCLUSION: Patients with SDB whose post- to pre-overnight SSBPs were elevated or
maintained a constant high have more sleep respiratory disturbance, more
pro-inflammatory state, and higher metabolic syndrome indices than the rest.
Without subdividing into CONSTANT LOW, MORNING DROP, CONSTANT HIGH, and MORNING
SURGE, the important pathophysiologic points of SDB patients will possibly be
missed.

PMID: 18952496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Arch Physiol Biochem. 2008 Oct;114(4):211-23. doi: 10.1080/13813450802364627 .

Does obesity play a major role in the pathogenesis of sleep apnoea and its
associated manifestations via inflammation, visceral adiposity, and insulin
resistance?

Vgontzas AN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Hershey, PA
17033, USA. avgontzas@psu.edu

Despite the early recognition of the strong association between obstructive sleep
apnoea (OSA) and obesity, and OSA and cardiovascular problems, sleep apnoea has
been treated as a "local abnormality" of the respiratory track rather than as a
"systemic illness". In 1997, we first reported that the pro-inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) were
elevated in patients with disorders of excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and
proposed that these cytokines were mediators of daytime sleepiness. In subsequent
studies, it was shown that IL-6, TNFalpha, and insulin levels were elevated in
sleep apnoea independently of obesity and that visceral fat was the primary
parameter linked with sleep apnoea. Further studies showed that women with the
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) were much more likely than controls to have
sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) and daytime sleepiness, suggesting a
pathogenetic role of insulin resistance in OSA. Additional accumulated evidence
that supports the role of obesity and the associated metabolic aberrations in the
pathogenesis of sleep apnoea and related symptoms include: obesity without sleep 
apnoea is associated with daytime sleepiness; the protective role of gonadal
hormones as suggested by the increased prevalence of sleep apnoea in
post-menopausal women and the significantly reduced risk for OSA in women on
hormonal therapy; partial effects of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
in obese patients with apnoea on hypercytokinemia, insulin resistance indices,
and visceral fat; and that the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in the U.S.
population from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(1988-1994) parallels the prevalence of symptomatic sleep apnoea in general
random samples. Furthermore, the beneficial effect of a cytokine antagonist on
EDS and apnoea in obese, male apnoeics and that of exercise and weight loss on
SDB and EDS in general random or clinical samples, supports the hypothesis that
cytokines and insulin resistance are mediators of EDS and sleep apnoea in humans.
Finally, our recent finding that in obese, hypothalamic CRH neuron is hypoactive,
provides additional evidence on the potential central neural mechanisms for
depressed ventilation and consequent development of sleep apnoea in obese
individuals. In conclusion, accumulating evidence provides support to our thesis 
that obesity via inflammation, insulin resistance, visceral adiposity, and
central neural mechanisms, e.g. hypofunctioning hypothalamic CRH, play a major
role in the pathogenesis of sleep apnoea, sleepiness, and the associated
cardiovascular co-morbidities.

PMID: 18946782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Brain Behav Immun. 2009 Jul;23(5):605-10. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2008.09.014. Epub
2008 Oct 4.

Effects of gender and dementia severity on Alzheimer's disease caregivers' sleep 
and biomarkers of coagulation and inflammation.

Mills PJ(1), Ancoli-Israel S, von Känel R, Mausbach BT, Aschbacher K, Patterson
TL, Ziegler MG, Dimsdale JE, Grant I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA. pmills@ucsd.edu

BACKGROUND: Being a caregiver for a spouse with Alzheimer's disease is associated
with increased risk for cardiovascular illness, particularly for males. This
study examined the effects of caregiver gender and severity of the spouse's
dementia on sleep, coagulation, and inflammation in the caregiver.
METHODS: Eighty-one male and female spousal caregivers and 41 non-caregivers
participated (mean age of all participants 70.2 years). Full-night
polysomnography (PSG) was recorded in each participants home. Severity of the
Alzheimer's disease patient's dementia was determined by the Clinical Dementia
Rating (CDR) scale. The Role Overload scale was completed as an assessment of
caregiving stress. Blood was drawn to assess circulating levels of D-dimer and
Interleukin-6 (IL-6).
RESULTS: Male caregivers who were caring for a spouse with moderate to severe
dementia spent significantly more time awake after sleep onset than female
caregivers caring for spouses with moderate to severe dementia (p=.011), who
spent a similar amount of time awake after sleep onset to caregivers of low
dementia spouses and to non-caregivers. Similarly, male caregivers caring for
spouses with worse dementia had significantly higher circulating levels of
D-dimer (p=.034) than females caring for spouses with worse dementia. In multiple
regression analysis (adjusted R(2)=.270, p<.001), elevated D-dimer levels were
predicted by a combination of the CDR rating of the patient (p=.047) as well as
greater time awake after sleep onset (p=.046).
DISCUSSION: The findings suggest that males caring for spouses with more severe
dementia experience more disturbed sleep and have greater coagulation, the latter
being associated with the disturbed sleep. These findings may provide insight
into why male caregivers of spouses with Alzheimer's disease are at increased
risk for illness, particularly cardiovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC2757046
PMID: 18930805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Res Dev Disabil. 2009 May-Jun;30(3):567-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2008.08.004. Epub
2008 Oct 1.

Nitric oxide and interlukin-6 levels in intellectual disability adults with
epilepsy.

Carmeli E(1), Beiker R, Morad M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Stanley, Steyer
School of Health Professions, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv 69978, Israel.
elie@post.tau.ac.il

Nitric oxide (NO) and interlukin-6 (IL-6) are highly reactive mediators that have
been shown to play different roles in a variety of different biological process. 
The role of NO and IL-6 in the neuropathogenesis of brain seizures is still
questionable. In order to evaluate the role of NO and IL-6 in neurological
disorders such as seizures, we investigated 19 adults with intellectual
disability (ID) who suffer from epilepsy and treated for convulsions. NO
metabolites (NOx) and IL-6 levels in serum obtained after night-sleep were
significantly high among ID individuals diagnosed with epilepsy versus ID people 
without epilepsy. These results indicated that NOx and IL-6 may have a
pathophysiological role in convulsions. Consequently, we suggest that
professionals consider chemical inhibitors that might be helpful against the
function of NO and IL-6.

PMID: 18834707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Ann Acad Med Singapore. 2008 Aug;37(8):649-54.

Inflammatory cytokines and childhood obstructive sleep apnoea.

Li AM(1), Lam HS, Chan MH, So HK, Ng SK, Chan IH, Lam CW, Wing YK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Prince of Wales Hospital, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate serum cytokine concentrations in children with and without
obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) and to investigate the effects of OSA treatment on
cytokines.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Consecutive children with habitual snoring and symptoms
suggestive of OSA were recruited. They completed a sleep apnoea symptom
questionnaire, underwent physical examination and overnight polysomnography
(PSG). OSA was diagnosed if obstructive apnoea index (OAI) >1. A blood sample was
collected for analysis of IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-alpha after PSG.
RESULTS: One hundred forty-two children (97 males) with a median (IQR) age of
11.1 years (9.0-12.8) were recruited. The commonest presenting symptoms were
nocturnal mouth breathing, prone sleeping position and poor attention at school. 
Forty-seven children were found to have OSA and they had higher serum IL-6 [0.1
(0.1-0.4) vs 0.1 (0.1-0.1) pg/mL, P = 0.001] and IL-8 [1.7 (1.0-2.3) vs 1.3
(0.9-1.7) pg/mL, P = 0.029] concentrations compared to their non-OSA
counterparts. Multiple regression analysis indicated that OAI was significantly
associated with both IL-6 (r = 0.351, P <0.001) and IL-8 (r = 0.266, P = 0.002). 
Sixteen children underwent treatment and there was significant reduction in mean 
(SD) serum IL-8 after intervention [pre vs post levels of 1.9 (1.0) vs 1.1 (0.6) 
pg/mL, P = 0.001] independent of weight loss.
CONCLUSION: Children with OSA had elevated levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines
that normalised following treatment suggesting that the inflammatory response is 
potentially reversible. Early detection and intervention may be beneficial.

PMID: 18797557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Cancer. 2008 Oct 15;113(8):2102-9. doi: 10.1002/cncr.23820.

Serum interleukin-6 predicts the development of multiple symptoms at nadir of
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Wang XS(1), Shi Q, Williams LA, Cleeland CS, Mobley GM, Reuben JM, Lee BN, Giralt
SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Symptom Research, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. xswang@mdanderson.org

BACKGROUND: During the time of lowest white blood cell count (nadir) of
allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT), cancer patients
suffer from tremendous symptom burden related to therapy that requires intensive 
patient care. However, the mechanism underlying the development of multiple
symptoms has not been established.
METHODS: To explore the role of inflammatory cytokines in the development of
treatment-related symptoms, we studied dynamic changes in symptoms and in serum
concentrations of inflammatory cytokines (interleukin [IL]-6, IL-8, soluble tumor
necrosis factor receptor 1 [sTNF-R1], IL-1 receptor antagonist, and IL-12p40p70) 
from pretherapy throughout the first 30 days of allo-HSCT in 30 patients with
acute myelogenous leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. We measured multiple
symptoms repeatedly using the M. D. Anderson Symptom Inventory. Mixed-effects
modeling was used to analyze longitudinal data.
RESULTS: In response to conditioning and stem-cell infusion, serum levels of IL-6
and the severity of multiple symptoms increased rapidly and peaked at nadir. From
baseline to nadir (approximately Day 8 post-transplantation), increase in IL-6
was significantly associated with worsening of the most severe symptoms (fatigue,
poor appetite, pain, drowsiness, dry mouth, and disturbed sleep; P< .01). During 
the first 30 days after transplantation, increases in IL-6 (P< .001) and sTNF-R1 
(P< .05) significantly predicted the increasing severity of these symptoms.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that release of systemic inflammatory
cytokines, mainly IL-6, corresponds to an increase in treatment-related
multiple-symptom burden during the nadir period of allo-HSCT.

(c) 2008 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC2633777
PMID: 18792065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Nov;295(5):E1095-105. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.90483.2008. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

In situ profiling of adipokines in subcutaneous microdialysates from lean and
obese individuals.

Murdolo G(1), Herder C, Wang Z, Rose B, Schmelz M, Jansson PA.

Author information: 
(1)The Lundberg Laboratory for Diabetes Research, Center of Excellence for
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Research, Department of Molecular and Clinical
Medicine, The Shalgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.
TUgiuseppe.murdolo@medic.gu.seUT

Adipose tissue (AT) had emerged as an endocrine organ and a key regulator of the 
metabolically triggered inflammation. The aims of this study were 1) to
investigate the usefulness of a multiplexed bioassay in characterizing a panel of
adipokines in subcutaneous (sc) microdialysate samples and 2) to determine
whether lean and obese individuals differ in their interstitial adipokines levels
following microdialysis (MD) probe insertion. Ultrafiltrating MD membranes were
inserted in opposite sites of the sc abdominal AT of six lean (L) and six obese
(OB) males at the beginning (M1) and during the last 120 min (M2) of the study.
Interstitial and serum concentrations of adipokines were quantified using the
Luminex technique and ELISA at 60-min intervals for 5 h. In comparison with L
subjects, OB subjects exhibited elevated interstitial leptin (P < 0.001), IL-8 (P
< 0.05), and IL-18 levels (P = 0.05), as well as higher serum concentrations of
leptin (P < 0.0001), IL-6 (P < 0.0001), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (P < 0.001), 
IL-8 (P = 0.01) and interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10 (P < 0.05). In samples 
from the M1 membranes, leptin decreased and IL-1alpha, IL-18, and RANTES
(regulated on activation, normal T-cell expressed and secreted) remained
relatively stable, whereas IL-6, IL-8, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
significantly increased after the first hour (P < 0.0001 vs. baseline). Notably, 
either the magnitude of increase from the initial values or the time pattern of
all the adipokines in M1 and M2 dialysates were similar between the groups. In
conclusion, the current work provides valuable information on the optimal time
frame to collect in situ AT microdialysate samples. Further studies are needed,
however, to unravel the intricate interplay of cytokines in AT interstitial
fluid.

PMID: 18780773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Chronobiol Int. 2008 Sep;25(5):827-34. doi: 10.1080/07420520802384101.

Day-night variations of serum interleukin-6 in patients with severe obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome before and after continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).

Burioka N(1), Miyata M, Fukuoka Y, Endo M, Shimizu E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Molecular Respirology, Faculty of Medicine,
Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. burioka@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) causes intermittent hypoxia and increases
in sympathetic activity and contributes to cardiovascular disorders.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is one of the important proinflammatory cytokines. We
examined the levels of serum IL-6 concentrations in nine patients with severe
OSAS at four different clock times during the 24 h before and after three months 
of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy. Serum IL-6 levels were
significantly reduced after CPAP therapy by 46% (6.2+/-1.0 vs. 3.3+/-0.4 pg/ml,
p<0.005). No significant 24 h variation of serum IL-6 in severe OSAS patients was
found before CPAP; however, a significant 24 h variation of serum IL-6 was found 
after CPAP. Intermittent hypoxia during sleep may contribute to systemic
inflammation and result in an elevation of serum IL-6 in severe OSAS patients.

PMID: 18780208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Clin Oncol. 2008 Oct 10;26(29):4820-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2007.14.1978. Epub 2008
Sep 8.

Interleukin-6, cortisol, and depressive symptoms in ovarian cancer patients.

Lutgendorf SK(1), Weinrib AZ, Penedo F, Russell D, DeGeest K, Costanzo ES,
Henderson PJ, Sephton SE, Rohleder N, Lucci JA 3rd, Cole S, Sood AK, Lubaroff DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
susan-lutgendorf@uiowa.edu

PURPOSE: Inflammatory processes have been implicated in the pathogenesis of both 
depression and cancer. Links between depressive symptoms, interleukin-6 (IL-6),
and cortisol dysregulation have been demonstrated in cancer patients, but
vegetative versus affective components of depression have been minimally
examined. The objective of the current study was to examine associations between 
IL-6, diurnal cortisol rhythms, and facets of depression in epithelial ovarian
cancer patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients awaiting surgery for a pelvic mass suspected for
ovarian cancer completed questionnaires, collected salivary samples for 3 days
presurgery, and gave a presurgical blood sample. Ascites was obtained during
surgery. IL-6 was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and cortisol by a
chemiluminescence immunoassay. The final sample included 112 invasive ovarian
cancer patients (86 advanced stage, 26 early stage) and 25 patients with tumors
of low malignant potential (LMP).
RESULTS: Advanced-stage ovarian cancer patients demonstrated elevations in
vegetative and affective depressive symptoms, plasma IL-6, and the cortisol area 
under the curve (AUC) compared with patients with LMP tumors (all P < .05). Among
invasive ovarian cancer patients, greater vegetative depression was related to
elevated IL-6 in plasma (P = .008) and ascites (P = .024), but affective
depression was unrelated to IL-6. Elevations in total depression (P = .026) and
vegetative depression (P = .005) were also related to higher evening cortisol
levels. Plasma IL-6 was related to greater afternoon and evening cortisol and
cortisol AUC (all P values < .005).
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate significant relationships between IL-6,
cortisol, and vegetative depression, and may have implications for treatment of
depression in ovarian cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2653140
PMID: 18779606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Pediatrics. 2008 Sep;122(3):e634-42. doi: 10.1542/peds.2008-0154.

Sleep-disordered breathing in children with metabolic syndrome: the role of
leptin and sympathetic nervous system activity and the effect of continuous
positive airway pressure.

Nakra N(1), Bhargava S, Dzuira J, Caprio S, Bazzy-Asaad A.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Section of
Respiratory Medicine, 333 Cedar St, Fitkin 510, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this work was to determine whether, in children with
metabolic syndrome and sleep-disordered breathing, metabolic markers separate
them from children with metabolic syndrome without sleep-disordered breathing and
whether treatment of sleep-disordered breathing with continuous positive airway
pressure is associated with an improvement in metabolic derangement.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Subjects aged 7 to 19 years old with metabolic syndrome and
a positive validated sleep questionnaire were recruited. Subjects underwent
overnight polysomnography, during which sympathetic nervous system activity was
assessed via 8-hourly measurements of norepinephrine and epinephrine, together
with leptin. The next morning, a fasting 3-hour oral glucose-tolerance test was
performed to calculate whole-body insulin sensitivity. A fasting lipid panel
interleukin 6, adiponectin, and C-reactive protein levels were also measured.
Children with sleep-disordered breathing were placed on continuous positive
airway pressure for 3 months and studied again. Sleep-disordered breathing and no
sleep-disordered breathing groups were compared by using Fisher's exact test and 
t test for independent samples with analysis of covariance to adjust for age and 
BMI.
RESULTS: Of 34 children studied, 25 had sleep-disordered breathing
(apnea-hypopnea index: >1.5). Mean hourly norepinephrine and leptin levels were
higher in the group with sleep-disordered breathing compared with the group
without sleep-disordered breathing (P < .005), with no difference in whole-body
insulin sensitivity. Eleven subjects with sleep-disordered breathing completed 3 
months of nightly continuous positive airway pressure treatment. In the follow-up
study, mean hourly leptin levels were significantly lower than in the initial
study, with no change in BMI z score or other measurements.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support the hypothesis that sleep-disordered breathing
in children with metabolic syndrome is associated with increased sympathetic
nervous system activity and leptin levels but not worsening of insulin
resistance. Treatment of sleep-disordered breathing with continuous positive
airway pressure led to a significant decrease in leptin levels.

PMID: 18762497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Chest. 2008 Nov;134(5):911-8. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-0886. Epub 2008 Aug 8.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha expression in uvular tissues differs between snorers 
and apneic patients.

Loubaki L(1), Jacques E, Semlali A, Biardel S, Chakir J, Sériès F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche, Hôpital Laval, Insitute Universitaire de Cardiologie et
de Pneumologie, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory changes such as subepithelial edema and excessive
inflammatory cell infiltration have been observed in uvular tissues of
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) subjects. The levels of proinflammatory cytokines
such as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin-6 are elevated in the
serum of apneic patients and have been proposed as mediators of muscle weakness. 
TNF-alpha has been shown to affect diaphragm contractility in mice and rabbit in 
vivo.
OBJECTIVES: To assess total and compartmental TNF-alpha expression in uvular
tissues of apneic and nonapneic patients.
METHODS: Uvular tissues were collected from 14 snorers without sleep disorders
breathing, 14 subjects with OSA (OSA 1 group) whose body mass index (BMI) was
similar to that of snorers, and 12 additional obese OSA subjects (OSA 2 group)
who underwent an uvulopalatopharyngoplasty. Sections were examined using
immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. TNF-alpha expression was
evaluated in the musculus uvulae (MU), epithelial layer, and perimuscular tissues
from proximal uvular sections.
RESULTS: TNF-alpha was more highly expressed in whole uvular protein extracts of 
apneic groups than in snorers ([mean +/- SEM] snorers, 100.5 +/- 3.0%; OSA 1
group, 127.1 +/- 6.9%; OSA 2 group, 140.7 +/- 11.0%; p = 0.01). In the muscular
area, TNF-alpha levels were higher in the more obese OSA subjects than in the
other two groups (snorers, 100.3 +/- 3%; OSA 1 group, 107.4 +/- 0.7%; OSA 2
group, 124.1 +/- 4.2%; p = 0.007). In the muscular area, TNF-alpha was correlated
with BMI, but no relationship was found with the apnea-hypopnea index.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that MU is the major TNF-alpha source in uvular tissue
and that TNF-alpha is more highly expressed in the heaviest OSA patients compared
to less obese OSA patients and nonapneic snorers.

PMID: 18689593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Hum Hypertens. 2009 Jan;23(1):65-7. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2008.101. Epub 2008 Aug 7.

Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome is associated with enhanced sub-clinical
inflammation and asymmetric dimethyl-arginine levels in hypertensives.

Thomopoulos C, Tsioufis C, Dimitriadis K, Tsiachris D, Tousoulis D, Manolis A,
Alchanatis M, Kallikazaros I, Stefanadis C.

PMID: 18685607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2009 Apr;13(2):101-6. doi: 10.1007/s10157-008-0074-1. Epub 2008
Aug 1.

The correction of anemia in patients with the combination of chronic kidney
disease and congestive heart failure may prevent progression of both conditions.

Silverberg DS(1), Wexler D, Iaina A, Schwartz D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Weizman 6, 64239, Tel Aviv,
Israel. donald@netvision.net.il

It has recently been recognized that many patients with congestive heart failure 
(CHF) are anemic. The anemia is very often associated with chronic kidney disease
(CKD). The more severe the anemia the more severe the CHF, with higher mortality,
morbidity, and hospitalization rate. The only way to prove that the anemia is
itself a causative factor in the progression of both the CKD and the CHF is to
correct it. In this paper we review the results of published papers and some
preliminary reports about correction of this anemia in CHF. These studies
frequently showed that erythropoietic stimulating agents (ESA) with oral or IV
iron often resulted in improvement in left ventricular systolic and diastolic
function, dilation, and hypertrophy, stabilization or improvement in renal
function, reduced hospitalizations, diuretic dose, mitral regurgitation,
pulmonary artery pressure, plasma volume, heart rate, serum brain natriuretic
peptide levels, and the inflammatory markers C reactive protein and Interleukin
6, and an improvement in New York Heart Association class, exercise capacity,
oxygen utilization during exercise, sleep apnea, caloric intake, depression, and 
quality of life. The activity of endothelial progenitor cells was also increased.
Iron deficiency may also play an important role in the anemia, because
significant improvement of cardiac, renal, and functional status in these anemic 
CKD-CHF has been seen after treatment with IV iron alone. Clearly more work is
needed to clarify the relationship between anemia, CKD and CHF.

PMID: 18670732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Acta Paediatr. 2008 Oct;97(10):1397-405. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2008.00927.x.
Epub 2008 Jul 8.

Correlation of 8-isoprostane, interleukin-6 and cardiac functions with clinical
score in childhood obstructive sleep apnoea.

Biltagi MA(1), Maguid MA, Ghafar MA, Farid E.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tanta University, Egypt.
mbelrem@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Adeno-tonsillar hypertrophy is the commonest cause of childhood
obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA). Our aim of the study is to correlate the severity
of OSA with levels of 8-isoprostane and interleukin-6 (IL-6) and with cardiac
diastolic dysfunctions.
METHODS: Forty children with adenoidal hypertrophy and 20 control children were
recruited. The OSA clinical score was evaluated and IL-6 and 8-isoprostane were
measured in exhaled breath condensate. The cardiac functions were evaluated by
conventional and tissue Doppler echocardiography (TDE).
RESULTS: Higher concentrations of isoprostane-8 and IL-6 were found in group with
clinical score >40 (58.595 +/- 2.86 pg/mL and 38 +/- 1.77 pg/mL, respectively)
than in control group (34.9 +/- 1.5 pg/mL and 7.02 +/- 0.3 pg/mL, respectively)
{p < 0.0001*}. There was positive correlation between level of isoprostane-8 and 
IL-6 and value of clinical score {p < 0.0001*} and also with the degree of the
cardiac dysfunction in those children.
CONCLUSION: The severity of OSA as indicated by clinical score was positively
correlated with degree of elevation of 8-Isoprostane and IL-6 in breath
condensate of children with OSA and also with degree of cardiac dysfunction.
Echocardiography and tissue Doppler modality are advised to examine these
children.

PMID: 18631340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Clin Invest. 2008 Aug;38(8):585-95. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2008.01984.x.

Selective effects of CPAP on sleep apnoea-associated manifestations.

Vgontzas AN(1), Zoumakis E, Bixler EO, Lin HM, Collins B, Basta M, Pejovic S,
Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State University College of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry , Hershey,
PA 17033, USA. avgontzas@psu.edu

BACKGROUND: Visceral adiposity and obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) may be
independently associated with daytime sleepiness/low performance, insulin
resistance, hypercytokinaemia, and/or hypertension. The objectives of this study 
are to simultaneously test these associations at baseline and after 3 months of
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixteen obese men with OSA; 13 non-apnoeic, obese
controls, and 15 non-obese controls were monitored in the sleep laboratory for
four consecutive nights. Objective measures of daytime sleepiness and
performance, serial 24 h plasma measures of interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumour necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), TNF receptor 1 (TNF-r1) and adiponectin, fasting blood 
glucose and insulin, visceral adiposity and blood pressure were obtained. Sleep
apnoeics were re-assessed using the same protocol after 3 months of CPAP.
RESULTS: At baseline, IL-6, TNF-r1, and insulin resistance were highest in OSA
patients, intermediate in obese controls, and lowest in non-obese controls (P <
0.05). Visceral fat was significantly greater in sleep apnoeics than obese
controls and predicted insulin resistance and IL-6 levels, whereas OSA predicted 
TNF-r1 levels (P < 0.05). CPAP decreased daytime sleepiness and blood pressure (P
< 0.05), but did not affect fasting glucose or insulin or around the clock
adiponectin, IL-6, TNF-alpha, or TNF-r1 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: In obese sleep apnoeics, visceral fat is strongly associated with
insulin resistance and inflammation. CPAP decreases sleepiness and moderates
hypertension but does not affect visceral adiposity, insulin resistance,
hypoadiponectinaemia or hypercytokinaemia, all of which are independent risk
factors for cardiovascular disease and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4528610
PMID: 18627419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Chest. 2008 Oct;134(4):686-92. doi: 10.1378/chest.08-0556. Epub 2008 Jul 14.

Effects of continuous positive airway pressure on cardiovascular risk profile in 
patients with severe obstructive sleep apnea and metabolic syndrome.

Dorkova Z(1), Petrasova D, Molcanyiova A, Popovnakova M, Tkacova R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, P.J. Safarik
University, Slovakia.

Comment in
    Chest. 2008 Oct;134(4):675-6.

BACKGROUND: The increased risk of atherosclerotic morbidity and mortality in
patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has been linked to arterial
hypertension, insulin resistance, systemic inflammation, and oxidative stress. We
aimed to determine the effects of 8 weeks of therapy with continuous positive
airway pressure (CPAP) on glucose and lipid profile, systemic inflammation,
oxidative stress, and global cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk in patients with
severe OSA and metabolic syndrome.
METHODS: In 32 patients, serum cholesterol, triglycerides, high-density
lipoprotein cholesterol, fibrinogen, apolipoprotein A-I, apolipoprotein B (ApoB),
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, leptin, malondialdehyde (MDA), and erythrocytic glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) activity were measured at baseline and after 8 weeks of CPAP.
The insulin resistance index (homeostasis model assessment [HOMA-IR]) was based
on the homeostasis model assessment method, the CVD risk was calculated using the
multivariable risk factor algorithm.
RESULTS: In patients who used CPAP for > or = 4 h/night (n = 16), CPAP therapy
reduced systolic BP and diastolic BP (p = 0.001 and p = 0.006, respectively),
total cholesterol (p = 0.002), ApoB (p = 0.009), HOMA-IR (p = 0.031), MDA (p =
0.004), and TNF-alpha (p = 0.037), and increased erythrocytic GPx activity (p =
0.015), in association with reductions in the global CVD risk (from 18.8 +/- 9.8 
to 13.9 +/- 9.7%, p = 0.001). No significant changes were seen in patients who
used CPAP for < 4 h/night. Mask leak was the strongest predictor of compliance
with CPAP therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with severe OSA and metabolic syndrome, good compliance 
to CPAP may improve insulin sensitivity, reduce systemic inflammation and
oxidative stress, and reduce the global CVD risk.

PMID: 18625666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Psychosom Med. 2008 Jul;70(6):646-52. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e31817b8ee4.

Community socioeconomic status is associated with circulating interleukin-6 and
C-reactive protein.

Petersen KL(1), Marsland AL, Flory J, Votruba-Drzal E, Muldoon MF, Manuck SB.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Physiology Laboratory, Department of Psychology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. karen.petersen2@va.gov

OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of both individual and community
socioeconomic status (SES) with inflammatory mediators relevant to cardiovascular
pathophysiology, i.e., interleukin (IL)-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP), in a
midlife community sample. Growing evidence suggests that socioeconomic attributes
of both individuals and communities confer risk for cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality.
METHODS: Subjects were 851 men and women, 30 to 54 years of age (Caucasian = 77%,
African-American = 23%). Individual SES was indexed by a composite of educational
attainment and family income, and community SES was indexed by corresponding
indicators derived from US Census data for participants' census tracts of
residence. Plasma concentrations of IL-6 and CRP were determined from blood
samples.
RESULTS: Regression analyses adjusting for age, sex, and race showed individual
SES to be associated inversely with IL-6 (B = -0.126, p < .01), and community SES
to be associated inversely with both IL-6 and CRP (B = -0.144, p < .01, B =
-0.097, p < .01, respectively). The relationship of community SES with IL-6, but 
not CRP, persisted on multivariable adjustment for both lifestyle risk factors
(smoking, alcohol consumption, sleep, exercise, body mass index) and individual
SES (IL-6: B = -0.084, p < .05; CRP: B = -0.047, p > .10). After adjustment for
lifestyle factors, however, individual SES was no longer associated with IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Independent of personal income or educational attainment, midlife
adults living in less advantaged neighborhoods exhibit higher levels of
circulating proinflammatory markers than residents of more affluent areas. This
association may help explain the increased risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular
morbidity and mortality conferred by low community-level SES.

PMID: 18606725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Respir Med. 2008 Oct;102(10):1399-405. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2008.04.021. Epub 2008
Jul 7.

Airway inflammation in obstructive sleep apnea: is leptin the missing link?

Antonopoulou S(1), Loukides S, Papatheodorou G, Roussos C, Alchanatis M.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Laboratory, 1st Respiratory Medicine Dept, Medical School, University of
Mesogeion 152, 15669, Athens, Greece. santonod@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Local and systemic inflammation is implicated in the pathophysiology 
of Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA). Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) is a
non-invasive sampling method for the lower airways. However, it is important to
consider the potential effect of the systemic origin whereas systemic
inflammation is significantly elevated. This prospective study was designed to
investigate whether airway inflammation is significantly related to plasma leptin
levels in OSA patients. Simultaneously, it was designed to investigate whether
inflammatory variables predict parameters expressing disease severity and finally
whether smoking habit affect the above measurements.
PATIENTS & METHODS: About 45 OSA patients (mean AHI 40+/-25, 28 smokers) and 25
healthy controls (AHI<5, 15 smokers) were studied and underwent overnight
diagnostic polysomnography. We measured pH, 8-isoprostane, TNF-alpha and IL-6 in 
EBC and leptin in plasma. Plausible associations between leptin and inflammatory 
parameters were analyzed after adjustment for proper variables. Similar
associations between inflammatory variables and parameters of disease severity
were also performed.
RESULTS: An increased level of leptin and respective increase of inflammatory
variables was found. No significant association was observed between parameters
of EBC and plasma leptin levels. A part of the parameters of disease severity is 
significantly associated with pH and 8-isoprostane. Smoking did not seem to be a 
critical confounding factor for evaluation of the above measurements.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased levels of leptin were not associated with the observed
airway inflammation in OSA. The observed airway inflammation seemed to be
independent of smoking habit with limited association with disease severity.

PMID: 18606530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2008 Jul;35(4):635-42. doi: 10.1188/08.ONF.635-642.

Effect of exercise on biomarkers, fatigue, sleep disturbances, and depressive
symptoms in older women with breast cancer receiving hormonal therapy.

Payne JK(1), Held J, Thorpe J, Shaw H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
payne031@mc.duke.edu

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To compare the effectiveness of a prescribed home-based
walking exercise intervention with usual care in older women receiving hormonal
treatment for breast cancer, and to examine relationships among levels of the
cortisol, serotonin, interleukin-6, and bilirubin biomarkers and fatigue, sleep
disturbances, and depressive symptoms.
DESIGN: Longitudinal randomized clinical trial.
SETTING: A National Cancer Institute-designated cancer center in the southeastern
United States.
SAMPLE: 20 women (aged 55 years or older) with breast cancer receiving hormonal
treatment.
METHODS: Participants were randomized to a walking exercise intervention or usual
care. Laboratory samples and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI), the Piper
Revised Fatigue Scale, and the Center for Epidemiological Studies-Depression
Scale were collected at the initial clinic visit and at 12 weeks from the groups.
Questionnaires also were collected at weeks 2 and 14.
MAIN RESEARCH VARIABLES: Fatigue, sleep disturbances, depressive symptoms,
biomarkers, and exercise.
FINDINGS: Effect of the exercise intervention on sleep scores was highly
significant between groups. Exercise group scores on the PSQI decreased
significantly over time (indicating improved sleep quality), although scores did 
not change significantly within the control group. Sleep actigraphy also showed
significantly shorter actual wake time and less movement in the exercise group.
Serotonin levels also were significantly affected by the intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Data suggest that a walking exercise intervention improves sleep in 
older women receiving hormonal treatment for their breast cancer. Serotonin
levels may be a useful biomarker when assessing sleep disturbances in this group.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Clinicians need to be aware that older women receiving 
hormonal treatment for their breast cancer may experience fatigue, sleep
disturbances, and depressive symptoms. Homebased walking activity may reduce
symptom severity in this group.

PMID: 18591167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Respiration. 2008;76(4):377-85. doi: 10.1159/000141866. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Resistin is closely related to systemic inflammation in obstructive sleep apnea.

Yamamoto Y(1), Fujiuchi S, Hiramatsu M, Nishigaki Y, Takeda A, Fujita Y, Yamazaki
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, National Hospital Organization, Dohoku
Hospital, Asahikawa, Japan. yasushiy@asahikawa.hosp.go.jp

Comment in
    Respiration. 2008;76(4):375-6.

BACKGROUND: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is closely related to systemic
inflammation. Resistin is an adipocyte-derived cytokine (adipokine) that may link
obesity with inflammation.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether incremental changes in OSA severity,
from normal to severe, primarily affect the levels of resistin and other
adipokines.
METHODS: Serum levels of resistin, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and leptin were examined 
in 31 men with OSA and 10 men without OSA, matched for age, body mass index (BMI)
and several metabolic profiles. In 11 of the 31 men with OSA, these mediators
were reexamined after 3 months of nasal continuous airway pressure (nCPAP)
therapy.
RESULTS: Levels of resistin and IL-6 were simultaneously elevated in men with OSA
compared with those in men without OSA (p < 0.05), while levels of leptin did not
differ. The resistin and IL-6 levels tended to increase with increasing disease
severity (p < 0.05), which was based on the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). The
average oxyhemoglobin saturation during sleep (p < 0.01) and IL-6 (p < 0.05)
emerged as significant determinants of resistin, even after adjustments for age, 
BMI, leptin levels and metabolic risk factors. After nCPAP therapy, the elevated 
levels of resistin and IL-6 decreased, reaching almost baseline levels of
controls. Before treatment, AHI correlated positively with the reduction rate in 
resistin (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: In OSA patients, resistin production can be enhanced by hypoxic
stress during sleep, possibly mediating systemic inflammatory processes. nCPAP
therapy may play a beneficial role in the control of resistin production.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18577878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Sep 15;64(6):538-40. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.05.004.
Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Sleep loss activates cellular inflammatory signaling.

Irwin MR(1), Wang M, Ribeiro D, Cho HJ, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Martinez-Maza O,
Cole S.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and
Human Behavior, University of California-Los Angeles, CA 90095-7076, USA.
mirwin1@ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests that sleep disturbance is associated
with inflammation and related disorders including cardiovascular disease,
arthritis, and diabetes mellitus. This study was undertaken to test the effects
of sleep loss on activation of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, a transcription factor
that serves a critical role in the inflammatory signaling cascade.
METHODS: In 14 healthy adults (seven women; seven men), peripheral blood
mononuclear cell NF-kappaB was repeatedly assessed, along with enumeration of
lymphocyte subpopulations, in the morning after baseline sleep, partial sleep
deprivation (awake from 11 pm to 3:00 am), and recovery sleep.
RESULTS: In the morning after a night of sleep loss, mononuclear cell NF-kappaB
activation was significantly greater compared with morning levels following
uninterrupted baseline or recovery sleep, in which the response was found in
female but not in male subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: These results identify NF-kappaB activation as a molecular pathway
by which sleep disturbance may influence leukocyte inflammatory gene expression
and the risk of inflammation-related disease.

PMCID: PMC2547406
PMID: 18561896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Sleep Breath. 2009 Mar;13(1):35-41. doi: 10.1007/s11325-008-0198-2. Epub 2008 Jun
13.

Relationship between inflammation and cognitive function in obstructive sleep
apnea.

Haensel A(1), Bardwell WA, Mills PJ, Loredo JS, Ancoli-Israel S, Morgan EE,
Heaton RK, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, University Hospital Berne, Berne,
Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) can have adverse effects on cognitive
functioning, mood, and cardiovascular functioning. OSA brings with it
disturbances in sleep architecture, oxygenation, sympathetic nervous system
function, and inflammatory processes. It is not clear which of these mechanisms
is linked to the decrease in cognitive functioning. This study examined the
effect of inflammatory parameters on cognitive dysfunction.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-nine patients with untreated sleep apnea were
evaluated by polysomnography and completed a battery of neuropsychological tests.
After the first night of evaluation in the sleep laboratory, blood samples were
taken for analysis of interleukin 6, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and
soluble TNF receptor 1 (sTNF-R1).
RESULTS: sTNF-R1 significantly correlated with cognitive dysfunction. In
hierarchical linear regression analysis, measures of obstructive sleep apnea
severity explained 5.5% of the variance in cognitive dysfunction (n.s.). After
including sTNF-R1, percentage of variance explained by the full model increased
more than threefold to 19.6% (F = 2.84, df = 3, 36, p = 0.05). Only sTNF-R1 had a
significant individual relationship with cognitive dysfunction (beta = 0.376 t = 
2.48, p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: sTNF-R1 as a marker of chronic inflammation may be associated with
diminished neuropsychological functioning in patients with OSA.

PMCID: PMC3175694
PMID: 18551328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Psychiatry. 2010 May;15(5):535-47. doi: 10.1038/mp.2008.58. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

Interferon-alpha effects on diurnal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity:
relationship with proinflammatory cytokines and behavior.

Raison CL(1), Borisov AS, Woolwine BJ, Massung B, Vogt G, Miller AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. craison@emory.edu

Interferon (IFN)-alpha has been used to investigate pathways by which innate
immune cytokines influence the brain and behavior. Accordingly, the impact of
IFN-alpha on diurnal secretion of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis
hormones was assessed in 33 patients eligible for treatment with IFN-alpha plus
ribavirin for hepatitis C. In addition, the relationship between
IFN-alpha-induced HPA axis changes and proinflammatory cytokines and behavior was
examined. Plasma ACTH and cortisol as well as tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, 
interleukin-6 and their soluble receptors, were measured hourly between 0900 and 
2100 hours at baseline and following approximately 12 weeks of either no
treatment (n=13) or treatment with IFN-alpha/ribavirin (n=20). Plasma IFN-alpha
was also measured at each visit. Depression and fatigue were assessed using the
Montgomery-Asberg depression rating scale and the multidimensional fatigue
inventory. Compared to no treatment, IFN-alpha/ribavirin administration was
associated with significant flattening of the diurnal ACTH and cortisol slope and
increased evening plasma ACTH and cortisol concentrations. Flattening of the
cortisol slope and increases in evening cortisol were correlated with increases
in depression (r=0.38, P<0.05 and r=0.36, P<0.05, respectively) and fatigue
(r=0.43, P<0.05 and r=0.49, P<0.01, respectively). No relationship was found
between immune and HPA axis measures, although increases in plasma IFN-alpha,
TNF-alpha and soluble TNF-alpha receptor2 were independently correlated with
behavioral endpoints. These data indicate that chronic exposure to innate immune 
cytokines may contribute to the altered diurnal HPA axis activity and behavior
found in medically ill individuals. However, given the lack of correlation
between HPA axis and immune measures, the mechanism by which chronic cytokine
exposure influences HPA axis function remains to be determined.

PMCID: PMC3403676
PMID: 18521089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Sleep Breath. 2008 Nov;12(4):397-9. doi: 10.1007/s11325-008-0192-8. Epub 2008 May
31.

Predictors of fatigue in obstructive sleep apnea.

Mills PJ(1), Kim JH, Bardwell W, Hong S, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA,
USA. pmills@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine potential inflammatory
predictors of fatigue in obstructive sleep apnea (OSA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifty-six women and men untreated OSA patients had their
sleep monitored with polysomnography. Fatigue was assessed by the
Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory-Short Form. Depressed mood was
assessed by the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale. Blood was
drawn to assess circulating levels of Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and soluble tumor
necrosis factor receptor I (sTNF-RI). Age, gender, body mass index (BMI), blood
pressure, OSA severity, depressed mood, and inflammatory biomarkers were entered 
into a hierarchical multiple linear regression analysis predicting self-reported 
fatigue.
RESULTS: Approximately 42% of the patients reported significant amounts of
fatigue. Higher BMI (p = 0.014), greater depressed mood (p = 0.004), and higher
sTNF-RI levels (p = 0.033) were independent predictors of fatigue in the final
model (full model R2 = .571; p = .003). Age, gender, blood pressure and apnea
severity were unrelated to fatigue.
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that in addition to depressed mood, fatigue in
OSA may be associated with increased body weight and elevated levels of the
proinflammatory cytokine receptor sTNF-RI. The findings support a linkage between
the widely reported fatigue in OSA and a sleep-related component of inflammation.

PMCID: PMC2633300
PMID: 18516635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Sep 15;64(6):484-90. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.04.016.
Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Interleukin-6 covaries inversely with hippocampal grey matter volume in
middle-aged adults.

Marsland AL(1), Gianaros PJ, Abramowitch SM, Manuck SB, Hariri AR.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Immunology Laboratory, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.
marsland@pitt.edu

BACKGROUND: Converging animal findings suggest that higher peripheral levels of
inflammation are associated with activation of central inflammatory mechanisms
that result in hippocampal neurodegeneration and related impairment of memory
function. We have recently shown, consistent with animal findings, an inverse
association between peripheral levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), a relatively
stable marker of systemic inflammation, and memory function in mid-life adults.
In the current study, we extend this work to test whether systemic inflammation
is associated with reduced grey matter volume of the hippocampus.
METHODS: For this purpose, we used a computational structural neuroimaging method
(optimized voxel-based morphometry) to evaluate the relationship between plasma
IL-6 levels and hippocampal grey matter volume in a sample of 76 relatively
healthy community volunteers ages 30-54.
RESULTS: Peripheral levels of IL-6 covaried inversely with hippocampal grey
matter volume, and this relationship persisted after accounting for several
possible confounders, including age, gender, race, years of education, percent
body fat, blood pressure, smoking, physical activity, hours of sleep, alcohol
use, and total grey matter volume.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, this is the first report of a relationship between
a peripheral marker of IL-6 and hippocampal grey matter volume, raising the
possibility that low-grade systemic inflammation could plausibly presage
subclinical cognitive decline in part via structural neural pathways.

PMCID: PMC2562462
PMID: 18514163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Am J Kidney Dis. 2008 Aug;52(2):314-23. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2008.03.012. Epub
2008 May 29.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy for sleep disturbance in patients undergoing
peritoneal dialysis: a pilot randomized controlled trial.

Chen HY(1), Chiang CK, Wang HH, Hung KY, Lee YJ, Peng YS, Wu KD, Tsai TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Far Eastern Memorial 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Greater than 50% of dialysis patients experience sleep disturbances. 
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) is effective for treating chronic insomnia,
but its effectiveness has never been reported in peritoneal dialysis (PD)
patients and its association with cytokines is unknown. We investigated the
effectiveness of CBT in PD patients by assessing changes in sleep quality and
inflammatory cytokines.
STUDY DESIGN: Randomized control study with parallel-group design.
SETTING & PARTICIPANTS: 24 PD patients with insomnia in a tertiary medical center
without active medical and psychiatric illness were enrolled.
INTERVENTION: The intervention group (N = 13) received CBT from a psychiatrist
for 4 weeks and sleep hygiene education, whereas the control group (N = 11)
received only sleep hygiene education.
OUTCOMES & MEASUREMENTS: Primary outcomes were changes in the Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index and Fatigue Severity Scale scores, and secondary outcomes were
changes in serum interleukin 6 (IL-6), IL-1beta, IL-18, and tumor necrosis factor
alpha levels during the 4-week trial.
RESULTS: Median percentages of change in global Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index
scores were -14.3 (interquartile range, -35.7 to - 6.3) and -1.7 (interquartile
range, -7.6 to 7.8) in the intervention and control groups, respectively (P =
0.3). Median percentages of change in global Fatigue Severity Scale scores were
-12.1 (interquartile range, -59.8 to -1.5) and -10.5 (interquartile range, -14.3 
to 30.4) in the intervention and control groups, respectively (P = 0.04). Serum
IL-1beta level decreased in the intervention group, but increased in the control 
group (P = 0.04). There were no significant differences in changes in other
cytokines.
LIMITATIONS: This study had a small number of participants and short observation 
period, and some participants concurrently used hypnotics.
CONCLUSIONS: CBT may be effective for improving the quality of sleep and
decreasing fatigue and inflammatory cytokine levels. CBT can be an effective
nonpharmacological therapy for PD patients with sleep disturbances.

PMID: 18511165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Eur Respir J. 2008 Oct;32(4):1009-15. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00007008. Epub 2008
May 28.

CPAP decreases plasma levels of soluble tumour necrosis factor-alpha receptor 1
in obstructive sleep apnoea.

Arias MA(1), García-Río F, Alonso-Fernández A, Hernanz A, Hidalgo R,
Martínez-Mateo V, Bartolomé S, Rodríguez-Padial L.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Cardiology, Hospital Virgen de la Salud, Toledo.

There is increasing evidence that inflammation plays an important role in the
development of cardiovascular complications in patients with obstructive sleep
apnoea (OSA). No previous works have studied levels of soluble tumour necrosis
factor-alpha receptor (sTNFR)-1 in patients with OSA. The aims of the present
study were to examine serum levels of sTNFR-1 and the effect of nasal continuous 
positive airway pressure (CPAP) in patients with OSA. A prospective, randomised, 
placebo-controlled crossover study was performed. In total, 30 consecutive newly 
diagnosed OSA patients (apnoea/hypopnoea index 43.8+/-27.0 events x h(-1)) and 15
healthy obese patients were selected. Urinary levels of norepinephrine and
epinephrine, as well as plasma sTNFR-1, tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha,
interleukin (IL)-6 and leukotriene (LT)B(4) levels were obtained at baseline and 
after 3 months of CPAP or sham CPAP. Nocturnal urinary levels of norepinephrine, 
epinephrine and sTNFR-1 (1,053+/-269 versus 820+/-166 pg x mL(-1)) were
significantly higher in OSA patients. There were no significant differences in
plasma levels of IL-6, LTB(4), or TNF-alpha between the two study groups. There
were no significant differences in blood pressure, urinary catecholamine levels, 
or plasma IL-6, LTB(4) and TNF-alpha levels after both treatment modalities.
However, after 3 months of effective CPAP usage, sTNFR-1 levels were
significantly reduced (1,053+/-269 versus 899+/-254 pg x mL(-1)). Obstructive
sleep apnoea patients have higher levels of soluble tumour necrosis factor-alpha 
receptor 1 than individuals without OSA; soluble tumour necrosis factor-alpha
receptor 1 levels are lowered by continuous positive airway pressure therapy.
These findings further corroborate a potential role of inflammation in the
natural history of obstructive sleep apnoea.

PMID: 18508832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Psychosom Med. 2008 Apr;70(3):298-305. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0b013e3181651025. Epub
2008 Mar 31.

Alterations in diurnal salivary cortisol rhythm in a population-based sample of
cases with chronic fatigue syndrome.

Nater UM(1), Youngblood LS, Jones JF, Unger ER, Miller AH, Reeves WC, Heim C.

Author information: 
(1)Chronic Viral Diseases Branch, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Mail Stop A-15, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine diurnal salivary cortisol rhythms and plasma IL-6
concentrations in persons with chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), persons not
fulfilling a diagnosis of CFS (we term them cases with insufficient symptoms or
fatigue, ISF) and nonfatigued controls (NF). Previous studies of CFS patients
have implicated the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and the immune system in 
the pathophysiology of CFS, although results have been equivocal.
METHODS: Twenty-eight people with CFS, 35 persons with ISF, and 39 NF identified 
from the general population of Wichita, Kansas, were admitted to a research ward 
for 2 days. Saliva was collected immediately on awakening (6:30 AM), at 08:00 AM,
12 noon, 4:00 PM, 8:00 PM and at bedtime (10:00 PM) and plasma was obtained at
7:30 AM. Salivary cortisol concentrations were assessed using radioimmunoassay,
and plasma IL-6 was measured using sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: People with CFS demonstrated lower salivary cortisol concentrations in
the morning and higher salivary cortisol concentrations in the evening compared
with both ISF and NF groups indicating a flattening of the diurnal cortisol
profile. Mean plasma IL-6 concentrations were highest in CFS compared with the
other groups, although these differences were no longer significant after
controlling for BMI. Attenuated decline of salivary cortisol concentrations
across the day and IL-6 concentration were associated with fatigue symptoms in
CFS.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest an altered diurnal cortisol rhythm and IL-6
concentrations in CFS cases identified from a population-based sample.

PMID: 18378875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Jan;68(1):63-8. doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.086561. Epub 2008 Mar
28.

Overnight variations in cortisol, interleukin 6, tumour necrosis factor alpha and
other cytokines in people with rheumatoid arthritis.

Perry MG(1), Kirwan JR, Jessop DS, Hunt LP.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Rheumatology Unit,University of Bristol, Bristol Royal Infirmary,
Marlborough Street, Bristol BS2 8HW, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate overnight variations in absolute values and patterns of
cytokines including interleukin 6 (IL6) and tumour necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha) in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and to relate any changes to those
occurring in blood cortisol.
METHODS: A total of 16 people (8 female) with active RA and who had received no
recent glucocorticoids were admitted overnight. Blood samples were obtained at 13
time points between 21.00 and 10.00.
RESULTS: The geometric mean IL6 concentration rose significantly from 35 pg/ml at
22:00 to 64 pg/ml at 07:15 (repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA),
p<0.001). The geometric mean cortisol concentration rose significantly overnight 
from 57 ng/ml at 01:00 to 229 ng/ml at 07:15 (repeated measures ANOVA, p<0.001). 
Neither TNFalpha nor the other cytokines measured changed significantly. Using
cubic regression modelling IL6 began to rise before cortisol (range 0.01 to 4.83 
h) in eight participants and after cortisol (range 1.11 to 5.14 h) in three
participants. In a random coefficient model including data from all participants,
the estimated mean IL6 value began to rise 3.05 h before the estimated mean
cortisol value, with the IL6 peak occurring 0.70 h before the cortisol peak.
CONCLUSION: The mean IL6 and cortisol concentrations showed a significant
overnight variation. Neither TNFalpha nor the other cytokines measured changed
significantly. In a random coefficient model IL6 began to rise approximately 3 h,
and reached a peak about 40 min, before cortisol. These studies confirm that
there are abnormalities in plasma cortisol and IL6 concentrations and dynamics.
The data also link the overnight rise in IL6 to the circadian variation in
symptoms.

PMCID: PMC2596304
PMID: 18375536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Neuroendocrinol. 2008 May;20(5):632-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2826.2008.01701.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 15.

Biology of post-traumatic stress disorder in childhood and adolescence.

Pervanidou P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental-Behavioral Pediatrics Unit, First Department of Pediatrics,
Athens University Medical School, Aghia Sophia Children's Hospital, Athens,
Greece. ppervanid@med.uoa.gr

Diverse patterns of cortisol secretion with consistently high circulating
catecholamines have been reported in post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), an
anxiety state that develops after exposure to traumatic life events. Indeed,
peripheral cortisol levels have been reported to be low or normal in the majority
of adult chronic PTSD studies, whereas, in most paediatric studies, high cortisol
values have been documented. Longitudinal studies on PTSD biology, including the 
transition from childhood to adulthood, may shed light on these discrepancies. In
children, elevated evening salivary cortisol in the aftermath of the trauma was
predictive of PTSD development 6 months later, whereas plasma interleukin-6
correlated positively with evening cortisol and was equally predictive of later
PTSD. Longitudinal assessment of PTSD children 1 and 6 months later revealed
progressive normalisation of cortisol levels, whereas noradrenaline
concentrations became gradually higher. We hypothesise that, in adults with
chronic PTSD, low cortisol levels, together with high catecholamines, may reflect
a late event in the natural history of the disorder, months or years after the
trauma. The progressive divergence of cortisol and noradrenaline concentrations
over time may be responsible for PTSD maintenance in children and explain the
differences between the child and adult PTSD endophenotypes. In adults studied
immediately after the trauma, and by contrast to children, low cortisol levels
are predictive of later PTSD development. Our hypothesis that low cortisol levels
may reflect a previous trauma, earlier in development, is supported by the well
established observation that prior trauma is a risk factor for a new PTSD
diagnosis. The developmental stage of an individual in relation to previous
exposure to trauma and PTSD vulnerability are crucial variables that may
determine clinical and biological PTSD phenotypes and explain the discrepancies
between adults and children in reported cortisol levels.

PMID: 18363804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2008 Jun;294(6):L1049-54. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00526.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 21.

Toll-like receptor 2 is upregulated by hog confinement dust in an IL-6-dependent 
manner in the airway epithelium.

Bailey KL(1), Poole JA, Mathisen TL, Wyatt TA, Von Essen SG, Romberger DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Section, Deptartment of Internal
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5300, USA.
kbailey@unmc.edu

Hog confinement workers are at high risk to develop chronic bronchitis as a
result of their exposure to organic dust. Chronic bronchitis is characterized by 
inflammatory changes of the airway epithelium. A key mediator in inflammation is 
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2). We investigated the role of TLR2 in pulmonary
inflammation induced by hog confinement dust. Normal human bronchial epithelial
cells (NHBE) were grown in culture and exposed to hog confinement dust extract.
Hog confinement dust upregulated airway epithelial cell TLR2 mRNA in a
concentration- and time-dependent manner using real-time PCR. There was a similar
increase in TLR2 protein at 48 h as shown by Western blot. TLR2 was upregulated
on the surface of airway epithelial cells as shown by flow cytometry. A similar
upregulation of pulmonary TLR2 mRNA and protein was shown in a murine model of
hog confinement dust exposure. Hog confinement dust is known to stimulate
epithelial cells to produce IL-6. To determine whether TLR2 expression was being 
regulated by IL-6, the production of IL-6 was blocked using an IL-6-neutralizing 
antibody. This resulted in attenuation of the dust-induced upregulation of TLR2. 
To further demonstrate the importance of IL-6 in the regulation of TLR2, NHBE
were directly stimulated with recombinant human IL-6. IL-6 alone was able to
upregulate TLR2 in airway epithelial cells. Hog confinement dust upregulates TLR2
in the airway epithelium through an IL-6-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2749499
PMID: 18359883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Cyst Fibros. 2008 Sep;7(5):398-402. doi: 10.1016/j.jcf.2008.02.002. Epub 2008
Mar 18.

Plasma ghrelin and leptin in adult cystic fibrosis patients.

Cohen RI(1), Tsang D, Koenig S, Wilson D, McCloskey T, Chandra S.

Author information: 
(1)The Adult Cystic Fibrosis Center, The Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and
Sleep Medicine, The Long Island Jewish Medical Center, New Hyde Park, NY 11040,
USA. rcohen@lij.edu

BACKGROUND: Weight loss in cystic fibrosis (CF) may be associated with altered
levels of appetite stimulating peptide ghrelin and the appetite decreasing
peptide leptin. However, prior data on leptin in CF are conflicting, while the
data on ghrelin are scarce. We hypothesized that weight loss in CF is associated 
with low levels ghrelin and elevated levels of leptin.
METHODS: Plasma ghrelin, leptin, TNF-alpha, IL-1 and IL-6, BMI, fat free mass
(FFM), fat mass (FM) were measured in 74 CF adults and 20 controls. CF subjects
were divided into 3 groups based on lung disease: mild (n=19), moderate (n=30)
and severe (n=25).
RESULTS: Severe CF patients (% predicted FEV1 27+/-7; median BMI 21 kg/m2) had
significantly elevated ghrelin and decreased leptin compared to controls and
other CF subjects. Ghrelin correlated (r value, p value) with BMI (-0.35,<0.001),
FFM (-0.22,<0.05), FM (-0.41,<0.0001), FEV1 (-0.62,<0.001), TNF-alpha
(0.51,<0.0001), IL-1 (0.56,<0.0001), and IL-6 (0.33,<0.01). Leptin correlated (r 
value, p value) with BMI (0.40,<0.0001), FM (0.56,<0.0001), FEV1 (0.34,<0.05),
IL-1 (-0.51,<0.05) and TNF-alpha (-0.43,<0.0001). BMI and FEV1 were independent
predictors of ghrelin (-0.35,<0.05;-0.59,<0.001). FM was a predictor of leptin
(0.56,<0.0001). Cytokines were elevated only in severe CF (severe CF vs.
controls, pg/ml): TNF-alpha (3.4+/-0.6 vs. 1.2+/-0.4), IL-1 (3.5+/-1 vs.
0.2+/-0.1), IL-6 (17.4+/-4 vs. 2.4+/-2).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated ghrelin and decreased leptin levels are a consequence
rather than a cause of weight loss in advanced CF.

PMID: 18353734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Eur Respir J. 2008 Jul;32(1):105-12. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00138207. Epub 2008
Mar 5.

Clock gene dysfunction in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.

Burioka N(1), Koyanagi S, Endo M, Takata M, Fukuoka Y, Miyata M, Takeda K,
Chikumi H, Ohdo S, Shimizu E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology and Molecular Respirology, Faculty of Medicine,
Tottori University, 36-1 Nishimachi, Yonago 683-8504, Japan.
burioka@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Eur Respir J. 2008 Jul;32(1):1-2.

Clock genes regulate mammalian circadian rhythms, and dysfunction of clock genes 
can contribute to various disorders. To investigate whether obstructive sleep
apnoea syndrome (OSAS) influences clock gene function, the present authors
examined Period1 (Per1) mRNA expression in vitro and in vivo. In eight healthy
subjects and eight OSAS patients, plasma noradrenaline, serum interleukin (IL)-6,
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and Per1 mRNA expression in
peripheral whole blood were measured. Expression of Per1 mRNA in cultured cells
was examined under IL-6 or noradrenaline stimulation in vitro. After
noradrenaline was administered to mice in vivo, Per1 mRNA expression in the brain
was examined. The concentrations of serum IL-6, hsCRP and plasma noradrenaline
were elevated in OSAS patients, but improved by continuous positive airway
pressure (CPAP) therapy. Per1 mRNA expression in the peripheral blood
significantly decreased at 02:00 h by CPAP in OSAS patients. Stimulation with
IL-6 did not directly induce Per1 mRNA in vitro. Administration of noradrenaline 
induced Per1 mRNA in the cerebral cortex of mice in vivo. The current study
revealed that obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome caused clock gene dysfunction,
and continuous positive airway pressure helped to improve it. Sympathetic
activation and elevation of the plasma noradrenaline concentration in obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome may be one of the factors involved in disorders of Period1 
mRNA expression.

PMID: 18321934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2008 Oct;265(10):1275-9. doi:
10.1007/s00405-008-0627-7. Epub 2008 Mar 4.

Cytokine changes after surgical treatment of obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome.

Constantinidis J(1), Ereliadis S, Angouridakis N, Konstantinidis I, Vital V,
Angouridaki C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, AHEPA Hospital, 54 006 Thessaloniki, Greece. janconst@otenet.gr

Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) is associated with inflammatory
processes and elevated plasma cytokines. This study assesses the effect of
surgery in cytokine levels of OSAS patients. A total of 24 male patients with
mild to moderate OSAS, confirmed with polysomnography underwent septoplasty and
uvulo-palato-pharyngoplasty in a period of a year. Control group consisted of 12 
overweighted subjects and 15 obese subjects. Peripheral venous blood was
collected from each patient 1 week before surgical treatment and 6 months
postoperatively. Spontaneous production of tumour necrosis factor (TNF-a) by
monocytes and serum levels of IL-1beta and IL-6 were investigated. Control
subjects were also examined for the same pro-inflammatory cytokines. Production
of TNF-a and IL-6 were significantly elevated in OSAS patients and obese controls
compared with overweighted control subjects (p < 0.05). Serum levels of IL-1beta 
did not differ among the study groups. Preoperative cytokine values were
significantly correlated with the preoperative body mass index (BMI) and the
apnoea/hypopnoea index (AHI) in OSAS patients. Surgery resulted a significant
reduction in the TNF-a and IL-6 values of the study group. Decrease in cytokine
level was strongly correlated with the AHI decrease. The postoperative relative
percentage change of IL-6 values was significantly higher than this of TNF-a (p <
0.001). Surgical management of mild to moderate OSAS leads to a significant
reduction in TNF-a and IL-6 values. Our data indicate that AHI is an independent 
risk factor of systemic inflammation; however it affects cytokines to a lesser
degree compared with the BMI.

PMID: 18317790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Respiration. 2008;76(3):317-23. doi: 10.1159/000119542. Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Are biomarker levels a good follow-up tool for evaluating obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome treatments?

Li Y(1), Chongsuvivatwong V, Geater A, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical College, Kunming, China.

BACKGROUND: Polysomnography is the standard method for evaluating results of
treatments for obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), but it is time-consuming 
and often unavailable.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to analyze the correlations between sleepiness,
anthropometric parameters, exhaled breath condensate (EBC) and serum cytokine
levels with changes in the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI), in order to identify
potential measurements that could be an alternative to polysomnography.
METHODS: Based on AHI results, 22 non-OSAS and 68 OSAS cases were followed up.
Among the 68 patients, 5 underwent surgery, 2 were treated with oral appliances, 
33 were treated using continuous positive airway pressure and 28 were untreated. 
AHI, anthropometric parameters, serum and EBC levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-10 (IL-10), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and 8-isoprostane
were measured at baseline and after a 2-month follow-up. Correlations between the
AHI and the other parameters were examined. Akaike's information criterion (AIC) 
was used to evaluate the fit of logistic regression models, predicting
improvements in the severity of the condition from the parameters.
RESULTS: IL-6 and TNF-alpha in EBC and serum gave the highest correlation
coefficients (r = 0.62 and r = 0.71 in EBC; r = 0.58 and r = 0.66 in serum,
respectively) as well as the lowest AIC values (63.87, 68.97; 62.65, 70.64,
respectively). Reductions in waist circumference and weight also correlated with 
changes in AHI (r = 0.69, AIC = 80.26 and 88.76, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: IL-6 and TNF-alpha measurements may be used in OSAS treatment
follow-ups, when polysomnography is not available. Waist circumference and weight
could also be used when cytokine laboratory facilities are unavailable.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18311073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2008 Mar;58(3):415-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2007.10.010.

Disease severity, scratching, and sleep quality in patients with atopic
dermatitis.

Bender BG(1), Ballard R, Canono B, Murphy JR, Leung DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
Colorado 80206, USA. benderb@njc.org

BACKGROUND: The relationship between sleep quality and disease severity in
patients with atopic dermatitis has not been clearly defined.
METHODS: Sleep efficiency and scratching were measured over 2 nights by
polysomnography, actigraphy, and self-report in 20 adults with atopic dermatitis.
Tumor necrosis factor, interleukin (IL)-6, and IL-10 were assayed from a subset
of 9 participants.
RESULTS: Sleep measured by actigraphy and polysomnography were strongly
associated with each other. Decreased sleep efficiency was associated with
increasing disease severity, scratching, and IL-6. Self-reported sleep quality
and quality of life were not significantly correlated with either objective sleep
measure.
LIMITATIONS: Results in this pilot study await confirmation in a larger
investigation.
CONCLUSION: Objective measures but not self-report documented that increasing
severity of atopic dermatitis results in more scratching and declining sleep
quality. Our data also suggest an important relationship between sleep and IL-6.

PMID: 18280338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Ter Arkh. 2007;79(12):18-25.

[The activity of nonspecific inflammation in hypertensive patients].

[Article in Russian]

Oshchepkova EV, Dmitriev VA, Titiov VN, Rogoza AN, Masenko VP.

AIM: To study the indices of nonspecific inflammation (C-reactive protein--CRP,
interleukine 6--IL-6) in patients with essential hypertension (EH) as compared to
a circadian profile of blood pressure (BP); changes of CRP in the course of
therapy with indapamide-retard and ACE inhibitor perindopril.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The trial enrolled 81 patients with hypertension of stage
I-II, moderate and high risk, aged 45.1 +/- 1.3 years, free of chronic
inflammatory disease exacerbation, 2 months and more after acute respiratory
diseases and 2-week absence of antihypertensive therapy. CRP was estimated by
turbidimetry, IL-6--by ELISA, circadian BP monitoring was made using TM 2421
device. Seventeen patients were randomized to receive ariphon retard (Servier),
twenty patients--prestarium. The data were processed with STATISTICA 6 programs.
RESULTS: CRP level in the patients was 7.0 +/- 1.6 mg/l; an elevated CRP
concentration (> 3 mg/l) was registered in 55% patients. These patients
demonstrated a positive correlation of CRP concentration with the data of 24-h
systolic BP (r = 0.37, p < 0.05) and 24-h diastolic BP (r = 0.43, p = 0.003)
monitoring, abnormal circadian rhythm of BP (nondippers). IL-6 in the examinees
was 6.7 +/- 1.3 pg/ml. An elevated IL-6 concentration was detected in 30%. In
such patients a positive correlation was found between IL-6 and 24-h systolic and
diastolic BP (r = 0.88; p < 0.05 and r = 0.97; p < 0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSION: A positive correlation between CRP, IL-6 and BP may evidence for
involvement of nonspecific inflammation in the course of EH. Patients with
elevated CRP responded to ariphon retard with positive CRP dynamics. This can be 
explained by a relief of chronic hemodynamic stress. A positive CRP dynamics in
response to prestarium can be mediated by block of angiotensin II.

PMID: 18220025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Circ J. 2008 Feb;72(2):293-8.

Association between blood pressure variability and inflammatory marker in
hypertensive patients.

Kim KI(1), Lee JH, Chang HJ, Cho YS, Youn TJ, Chung WY, Chae IH, Choi DJ, Park
KU, Kim CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, 28 Yongondong,Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Blood pressure (BP) variability has been reported to be associated
with hypertensive target organ damage and cardiovascular events. However, the
exact mechanism linking BP variability and organ damage is uncertain. This study 
was designed to investigate the association between BP variability and
inflammatory marker in hypertensive patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Fifty-two hypertensive patients (28 men, 55.9+/-1.5 years)
completed 24-h ambulatory BP monitoring. Inflammatory markers were evaluated by
measuring plasma levels of interleukin (IL)-6, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha 
by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and high sensitive C-reactive protein
(hs-CRP) by particle-enhanced light-scattering immunoassay. BP variability was
obtained by calculating within-subject standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of
variation of BP. Subjects were grouped into tertiles according to IL-6,
TNF-alpha, and hs-CRP levels. A significant association between ambulatory BP and
TNF-alpha level was identified (P for trend =0.011). In contrast, no association 
was observed between BP and IL-6 level; however, BP variability index was linked 
to IL-6 level (P for trend =0.046). The association between inflammatory marker
and pattern of diurnal variation was investigated. The hs-CRP concentration was
significantly higher in the riser group compared with the dipper group. However, 
IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels did not differ among the different diurnal variation
groups. Correlation analysis showed varying associations between IL-6 and
TNF-alpha. TNF-alpha level correlated with the BP index; however, IL-6 level
correlated with the BP variability index. Multiple linear regression models
revealed that the SD of daytime systolic BP (beta=0.065, p=0.001) and age
(beta=0.024, p=0.016) were all positively and significantly related to IL-6. In
contrast, only daytime diastolic BP (beta=0.029, p=0.002) was independently
related to TNF-alpha.
CONCLUSION: Inflammatory markers are associated with BP variability in
hypertensive patients. This finding implies that inflammation may be a mediator
for the link between BP variability and target organ damage.

PMID: 18219169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Sleep Med. 2009 Jan;10(1):95-103. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.11.013. Epub 2008 Jan
22.

Exhaled breath condensate cytokine level as a diagnostic tool for obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome.

Li Y(1), Chongsuvivatwong V, Geater A, Liu A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Kunming
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China. liyongxia@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Relationships between exhaled breath condensate (EBC) and serum
cytokines and apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) in patients with excessive daytime
sleepiness and loud snoring were evaluated for their potential to predict the
severity of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS).
METHODS: Non-smoking patients with suspected OSAS who had undergone
polysomnography (PSG) were selected until 22 non-OSAS, and 22 mild, 22 moderate
and 24 severe OSAS cases based on AHI were achieved. Ten healthy smokers served
as a smoker control group. Interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-10 (IL-10), tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and 8-isoprostane were measured in EBC and
serum on the morning after PSG and related to OSAS severity using linear
discriminant analysis (LDA) and logistic regression (LR).
RESULTS: Biomarker levels, in both EBC and serum, differed significantly across
the four groups. Classification by LDA using IL-10 in EBC showed the highest
agreement with AHI classification (kappa=0.88). LR distinguished moderate and
severe OSAS from mild OSAS and non-OSAS perfectly using IL-6 in EBC and almost
perfectly using IL-10 in EBC (area under the ROC curve=0.997). The levels of
biomarkers among smokers overlapped with mild to severe OSAS patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Among non-smoker OSAS suspects, EBC IL-6 and IL-10 have potential to
predict severity of OSAS.

PMID: 18207457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2008 Apr;10(4):715-26. doi: 10.1089/ars.2007.1949.

Plasma thioredoxin, a novel oxidative stress marker, in patients with obstructive
sleep apnea before and after nasal continuous positive airway pressure.

Takahashi K(1), Chin K, Nakamura H, Morita S, Sumi K, Oga T, Matsumoto H, Niimi
A, Fukuhara S, Yodoi J, Mishima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is associated with increased cardiovascular
mortality, and oxidative stress was suggested to play an important role. We
hypothesized that the plasma TRX level, a novel oxidative stress marker, is
elevated in OSA patients. Plasma TRX and adiponectin levels, which are
significantly associated with cardiovascular mortality, were measured in 41
patients with severe OSA before (n = 41) and after (n = 27) nasal continuous
positive airway pressure therapy (nCPAP) for 1 month and in 12 subjects without
OSA (non-OSA group). The TRX level was significantly higher (p = 0.02) and the
adiponectin level was significantly lower (p = 0.02) in the OSA group than in the
non-OSA group. After 1 month of nCPAP (n = 27), the TRX level significantly
decreased (p = 0.03), and the adiponectin level significantly increased (p =
0.03). Among the 14 patients with untreated OSA, the TRX and adiponectin levels
did not significantly change over a 1-month interval. Among the 53 (41 OSA + 12
non-OSA) subjects, the TRX level was positively correlated with the respiratory
disturbance index (p = 0.001) and percentage of time with SaO(2) <90% (p =
0.0002). The adiponectin level, but not the TRX level, was correlated with the
BMI (n = 53; p = 0.02). Plasma TRX may be a unique marker for evaluating
oxidative stress and monitoring the effectiveness of nCPAP in OSA patients.

PMID: 18199002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 Feb;104(2):451-8. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

Diurnal variation, response to eccentric exercise, and association of
inflammatory mediators with muscle damage variables.

Miles MP(1), Andring JM, Pearson SD, Gordon LK, Kasper C, Depner CM, Kidd JR.

Author information: 
(1)Montana State Univ., Dept. of Health and Human Development, P.O. Box 173360,
Bozeman, MT 59717, USA. mmiles@montana.edu

This investigation determined whether inflammatory mediators 1) have diurnal
variations, 2) respond to high-force eccentric exercise, and 3) associate with
markers of muscle damage after high-force eccentric exercise. College-aged men
and women (n = 51) completed exercise (3 x 15 maximal eccentric elbow flexor
actions using 1 arm) and control conditions in random order. Blood was collected 
preexercise and 4, 8, 12, 24, 48, and 96 h postexercise. Additional measures
included maximal isometric force and midbiceps arm circumference (to detect
swelling). Serum and plasma were analyzed for soluble tumor necrosis factor
receptor-1 (sTNFR1), IL-6, C-reactive protein, cortisol, and creatine kinase (CK)
activity. Relative to the 7:00 AM point in the control condition, diurnal
decreases were measured at 12:00 PM and 4:00 PM for IL-6 and at 12:00 PM, 4:00
PM, and 8:00 PM for sTNFR1 and cortisol. sTNFR1, IL-6, CK, swelling, and soreness
were higher in the exercise compared with the control condition. The largest of
the inflammatory mediator responses was measured for IL-6 8 h postexercise in the
exercise (3.00 +/- 3.59 pg/ml) relative to the control condition (1.15 +/- 0.99
pg/ml). The IL-6 response (time-matched exercise--control concentration) at 8 h
associated (r > 0.282) with muscle soreness at 24 and 96 h, and the cortisol
response at 8 h associated (r > 0.285) with swelling at 8, 24, and 96 h. Thus
soreness and swelling, but not CK and strength loss, had a low association with
the inflammatory response following eccentric exercise.

PMID: 18079262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Aug 21;87(31):2181-4.

[Effect of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from patients with obstructive
sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome on apoptosis of vascular endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye CX(1), Gao XL, Ou Q, Li DF, Cen RJ, Zhou MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Diseases, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the mechanism of vascular endothelial cell injury in
patients with obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were collected early in the morning from 20
normal persons, 21 patients with mild OSAHS, 24 patients with moderate OSAHS, and
20 patients with severe OSAHS according to the results of polysomnography (PSG). 
Mononuclear cells (MNCs) were isolated and co-cultured with human umbilical vein 
endothelial cells of the strain ECV304 for 48 h. The levels of tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-alpha and interleukin (IL)-6 in the supernatant were measured by
ELISA, and the apoptosis rate and the protein expression level of Fas of the
endothelial cells were detected by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: The TNF-alpha level of the severe OSAHS group was (2.10 +/- 0.60)
microg/L, significantly higher than those of the moderate OSAHS, mild OSAHS, and 
normal control groups [(1.40 +/- 0.50) microg/L, (1.20 +/- 0.30) microg/L, and
(0.80 +/- 0.10) microg/L, F = 69.65, P < 0.01]. The IL-6 level of the severe
OSAHS group was (64.80 +/- 9.90) microg/L, significantly higher than those of the
moderate OSAHS, mild OSAHS, and normal control groups [(46.90 +/- 10.80)
microg/L, (49.60 +/- 2.80) microg/L, and (23.50 +/- 6.50) microg/L, F = 182.83, P
< 0.01]. The TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels of the severe OSAHS group were both
significantly higher than those of the moderate and mild OSAHS groups (both P <
0.01). However, there was no significant differences in the TNF-alpha and IL-6
levels between the mild and moderate OSAHS groups (both P > 0.05). The apoptosis 
rates of endothelial cells in the severe and moderate OSAHS groups were 19.6% +/-
3.8% and 19.3% +/- 6.3% respectively, both significantly higher than those of the
mild OSAHS and control groups (9.2% +/- 3.0% and 8.3% +/- 3.2% (both P < 0.01)
whereas there were no significant differences between the mild OSAHS group and
control group and between the moderate OSAHS group and severe group (both P >
0.05). There was no significant difference in the protein level of Fas expressed 
in the endothelial cells between the OSAHS patients and the controls (all P >
0.05). There was a significant positive correlation between the apoptosis rate of
endothelial cells and AHI (r = 0.589 13, P = 0.0106), and a significant negative 
correlation between the apoptosis rate and the minimum oxygen saturation (r =
-0.507 37, P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: MNCs may play an important role in vascular endothelial cell injury
in the OSAHS patients, and may be associated closely with the severity of the
OSAHS and night hypoxemia.

PMID: 18001526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Int J Sports Med. 2008 Feb;29(2):102-9. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Resistive exercise blunts LPS-stimulated TNF-alpha and Il-1 beta.

Phillips MD(1), Flynn MG, McFarlin BK, Stewart LK, Timmerman KL, Ji H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kinesiology, Texas Christian University, Fort Worth, TX 76123,
USA. m.phillips@tcu.edu

To examine the influence of acute resistive exercise and "hormone status" on
cytokine profile, 35 postmenopausal women (72 +/- 6.2 yr) underwent a
moderate-high-intensity resistive exercise bout or rested. There were 4 groups:
no hormone replacement (NHR, n = 9), hormone replacement (HRT, n = 12), selective
estrogen receptor modulator (SER, n = 7), or resting control (no hormone
replacement, CON, n = 7). NHR, HRT, and SER exercised (3 sets, 10 exercises @ 80 
% 1RM). Blood was collected pre-exercise (PR), postexercise (PO), and two hours
(2H) postexercise (same times for CON). Blood was diluted 1 : 10 in culture
medium and incubated (37 degrees C, 5 % CO2, 24 h) with lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 
25 microg . ml (-1)). Serum and supernatant from LPS-stimulated blood were
analyzed for IL-6, IL-1 beta, and TNF-alpha using ELISA. Resistive exercise
increased PO serum IL-6, and PO LPS-stimulated IL-6 and IL-1 beta in the exercise
groups (HRT, NHR, SER collapsed; EX, n = 28). LPS-stimulated IL-1 beta remained
elevated at 2H in EX and was significantly higher than PR in CON at 2H. Expressed
per monocyte, EX had significantly lower IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha LPS-stimulated
production at PO and 2H compared to CON, indicating an exercise-induced blunting 
of an apparent diurnal response on cytokine production. In postmenopausal women, 
acute resistive exercise increased circulating IL-6, but reversed an apparent
diurnal increase in LPS-stimulated IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha production with no
influence of hormone replacement or raloxifene.

PMID: 17990210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mult Scler. 2007 Nov;13(9):1138-45.

Time of interferon-beta 1a injection and duration of treatment affect clinical
side effects and acute changes of plasma hormone and cytokine levels in multiple 
sclerosis patients.

Kümpfel T(1), Schwan M, Pollmächer T, Yassouridis A, Uhr M, Trenkwalder C, Weber 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Neuroimmunology, Klinikum Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Germany.
tania.kuempfel@med.uni-muenchen.de

During initiation of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) therapy, many multiple sclerosis 
(MS) patients experience systemic side effects which may depend on the time point
of IFN-beta injection. We investigated the time course of plasma hormone-,
cytokine- and cytokine-receptor concentrations after the first injection of
IFN-beta either at 8.00 a.m. (group A) or at 6.00 p.m. (group B) and quantified
clinical side effects within the first 9 h in 16 medication free patients with
relapsing-remitting MS. This investigation was repeated after 6-month IFN-beta
therapy. Plasma ACTH and cortisol concentrations followed their physiological
rhythms, with lower levels in the evening compared to the morning, but raised
earlier and stronger in group B after IFN-beta administration. IFN-beta injection
in the evening led to a prompter increase of plasma IL-6 concentrations and
temperature during the first hours and correlated to more intense clinical side
effects compared to group A. Plasma IL-10 concentrations increased more in group 
A compared to group B, but sTNF-RI and sTNF-RII concentrations raised 7 h after
IFN-beta injection only in group B. Acute effects on plasma hormone and cytokine 
concentrations adapted after 6-month IFN-beta treatment, while diurnal variations
were still present. Baseline sTNF-RII concentrations were elevated after 6-month 
IFN-beta therapy only in group A. Our results show that time point of IFN-beta
injection has differential effects on acute changes of plasma hormone and
cytokine concentrations and is related to systemic side effects. This may have
implications on the tolerability and effectiveness of IFN-beta therapy.

PMID: 17967841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Reprod Sci. 2007 Sep;14(6):560-7.

Sleep disturbances increase interleukin-6 production during pregnancy:
implications for pregnancy complications.

Okun ML(1), Hall M, Coussons-Read ME.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center/Western Psychiatric Institute &
Clinic, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Pregnant women experience disturbed sleep that varies throughout the gestational 
period. In clinical studies of nonpregnant cohorts, data link disturbed sleep
with increases in inflammatory markers. Emerging evidence has also found
associations between increased inflammation and medical morbidity, including
various pregnancy complications. The authors have previously shown a correlation 
between sleep disturbances and serum cytokine levels. They extend this initial
observation by evaluating the relationship between sleep during mid and late
pregnancy and inflammatory cytokines in both serum and stimulated peripheral
blood mononuclear cells. Subjective sleep during pregnancy, described by the
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index and sleep diaries, and circulating and stimulated 
measures of interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha were
evaluated in 19 pregnant women. The authors found that greater sleep complaints
in late pregnancy were associated with both increased circulating and stimulated 
IL-6 levels. Short sleep duration and poor sleep efficiency in both mid and late 
pregnancy were associated with higher stimulated levels of IL-6. No relationships
were observed for TNF-alpha. These preliminary findings indicate that women who
experience sleep disturbances as early as mid gestation are likely to have an
increase in inflammation.

PMID: 17959884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Sleep Med. 2008 Aug;9(6):667-74. Epub 2007 Oct 24.

Increased plasma levels of inflammatory markers and upper airway resistance
during sleep in pre-eclampsia.

Bachour A(1), Teramo K, Hiilesmaa V, Maasilta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. adel.bachour@hus.fi

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate pregnancy-associated sleep disorders, pregnancy outcomes 
and inflammatory markers in pre-eclampsia and normal pregnancy (control).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 15 consecutive pre-eclamptic women and 14
controls. Pre-eclamptic women underwent overnight pulse oximetry and nasal
pressure measurements at a university teaching hospital, and the sleep study for 
the controls was performed at home. Mean gestation was 31 weeks. Nasal airflow
was carefully analyzed visually, and the time with flow limitation was calculated
as a percentage of total recording time. At the time of the sleep study, the
subjects were clinically evaluated, they answered sleep questionnaires, and
fasting blood samples were drawn for tumor necrosis factor alpha TNF-alpha,
interleukin 6 (IL-6) and sensitive C-reactive protein. Pregnancy outcomes were
collected after delivery.
RESULTS: Pre-eclampsia patients spent significantly more time with flow
limitation (mean+/-SD: 21+/-18% vs. 4+/-9%), had higher plasma levels of
TNF-alpha (6.2+/-2.3 ng/l vs. 4.1+/-ng/l) and IL-6 (4.4+/-ng/l vs. 1.2+/-0.4
ng/l), had more generalized edema, had increased fatigue and snoring, and had
poorer pregnancy outcomes than did controls. Age, gestational age, mean SpO2 and 
body mass index did not differ between the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Pregnant women with pre-eclampsia showed significantly more nasal
flow limitation during the night, higher fasting IL-6 and TNF-alpha plasma
levels, more edema and worse pregnancy outcomes than did healthy pregnant women.

PMID: 17921067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Sleep. 2007 Sep;30(9):1145-52.

Elevated inflammatory markers in response to prolonged sleep restriction are
associated with increased pain experience in healthy volunteers.

Haack M(1), Sanchez E, Mullington JM.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02215, USA. mhaack@bidmc.harvard.edu

CONTEXT: Sleep disturbances, pain, and inflammation co-occur in various medical
conditions, but their interrelationships are poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of reduced sleep duration (by
approximately 50%) to 4 h/night across 10 days, on peripherally circulating
inflammatory mediators. In addition, we tested the prediction that degree of
inflammation is quantitatively related to the extent to which pain is increased
in response to prolonged sleep restriction.
DESIGN: Randomized, 16 day controlled in-laboratory study conducted in GCRC.
METHODS: Eighteen volunteers were randomly assigned to either 12 days of sleeping
8 h/night or 4 h/night. Participants rated mood and pain symptoms throughout
experimental days. Urine was collected and blood was drawn frequently on the
baseline day and after the 10th experimental day for 25 hours.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels of plasma interleukin (IL)-6, serum C-reactive protein
(CRP), plasma soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor p55 (sTNF-R p55), urinary
levels of prostaglandin (PG) metabolites D2 and E2, subjective assessment of pain
and tiredness-fatigue.
RESULTS: IL-6 levels were elevated in the 4-h sleep condition over the 8-h sleep 
condition (P <0.05). CRP levels showed the same trend as IL-6, but did not differ
significantly between groups (P = 0.11). Levels of sTNF-R p55 were unchanged in
both groups. PG E2 and 11beta-F2alpha metabolite increased in 4-h sleepers, but
did not differ significantly from the 8-h sleepers. Elevated IL-6 levels were
strongly associated with increased pain ratings in response to sleep restriction 
(r = 0.67, P <0.01), and this association could not be explained by elevations in
tiredness-fatigue.
CONCLUSION: Insufficient sleep quantity may facilitate and/or exacerbate pain
through elevations of IL-6. In disorders where sleep disturbances are common,
insufficient sleep quantity itself may establish and maintain its co-occurrence
with pain and increased inflammation.

PMCID: PMC1978405
PMID: 17910386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Biomarkers. 2008 Feb;13(1):59-78.

Pre-analytical and biological variability in circulating interleukin 6 in healthy
subjects and patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Knudsen LS(1), Christensen IJ, Lottenburger T, Svendsen MN, Nielsen HJ, Nielsen
L, Hørslev-Petersen K, Jensen JE, Kollerup G, Johansen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology Q 107, Herlev Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, DK-2730 
Herlev, Denmark. surland@dadlnet.dk

Interleukin (IL)-6, a key player in the inflammatory response, may be a useful
biomarker in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The aim was to determine analytical
variability, a reference interval in healthy subjects, and long- and short-term
variation in serum and plasma IL-6 in healthy subjects and RA patients. An
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay from R&D was used for determination of serum
and plasma IL-6. The IL-6 concentration did not depend on the type of
anticoagulant used or the 3-h time delay between sampling and processing or
repeated freeze-thaw cycles. The median plasma and serum IL-6 in 318 healthy
subjects were 1.3 pg ml(-1) (range 0.33-26) and 1.4 pg ml(-1) (range 0.25-23),
respectively. The median coefficient of variation in plasma IL-6 in 27 healthy
subjects during 1 month, and repeated after 6 and 12 months were 27%, 31% and
26%, respectively. No significant long-term changes were observed in serum IL-6
over a 3-year period (14%, p = 0.33). Exercise (cycling) increased serum IL-6 in 
healthy subjects but not in RA patients. In conclusion, circulating IL-6 is
stable regarding sample handling and shows little variation over time. Changes in
IL-6 concentrations > 60% (2 times the biological variation) are likely to
reflect changes in disease activity and not only pre-analytical or normal
biological variability.

PMID: 17852075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2007 Sep-Nov;32(8-10):991-9. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Elevated morning serum interleukin (IL)-6 or evening salivary cortisol
concentrations predict posttraumatic stress disorder in children and adolescents 
six months after a motor vehicle accident.

Pervanidou P(1), Kolaitis G, Charitaki S, Margeli A, Ferentinos S, Bakoula C,
Lazaropoulou C, Papassotiriou I, Tsiantis J, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pediatrics, Athens University Medical School, Aghia Sophia
Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece. ppervanid@med.uoa.gr

BACKGROUND: This study examined prospectively the activity of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, the sympathetic nervous system and
inflammatory factors in children shortly after a motor vehicle accident (MVA) in 
relation to later posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) development.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty six children, aged 7-18, were studied after an MVA
and 1 and 6 months later; 40 subjects served as controls. Morning serum cortisol 
and interleukin (IL)-6 and plasma catecholamine concentrations were measured
within 24h after the event. Salivary cortisol was measured 5 times at defined
time points during the same day. PTSD diagnoses 1 and 6 months later were based
on K-SADS interview.
RESULTS: Morning serum IL-6 concentrations, measured within the first 24h after
the accident, were higher in children that developed PTSD 6 months later than
those who did not and those of the control group. Longitudinal IL-6 measurements 
revealed normalization of IL-6 in the PTSD group, while no differences between
the three groups were detected 1 and 6 months later. Evening salivary cortisol
and morning serum IL-6 after the accident were positively inter-related (r=0.54, 
p<0.001) and in separate regression analyses both predicted PTSD development 6
months later. In contrast, morning serum IL-6 did nor correlate with morning
serum or salivary cortisol concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: Immediate posttraumatic alterations in neuroendocrine or
inflammatory factors-increased evening salivary cortisol and/or increased morning
serum IL-6 concentrations-are involved in subsequent PTSD development in children
and adolescents.

PMID: 17825995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Sleep Med. 2008 Mar;9(3):254-9. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Systemic inflammation in non-obese children with obstructive sleep apnea.

Gozal D(1), Serpero LD, Sans Capdevila O, Kheirandish-Gozal L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Sleep Medicine and Kosair Children's Hospital Research
Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of Louisville, 570 South Preston 
Street, Suite 204, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. david.gozal@louisville.edu

BACKGROUND: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) has been associated with increased
systemic inflammatory responses that may contribute to an increased risk for
end-organ morbidity. The changes in levels of pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 ,
and the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10, both of which play a major role in
atherogenesis, a major consequence of OSA, have not specifically been assessed in
pediatric patients.
METHODS: Consecutive non-obese children (aged 4-9years) who were
polysomnographically diagnosed with OSA, and age-, gender-, ethnicity-, and
BMI-matched control children underwent a blood draw the next morning after a
sleep study and plasma samples were assayed for interleukins 6 (IL-6) and 10
(IL-10). These tests were repeated 4-6months after tonsillectomy and
adenoidectomy (T&A) in children with OSA.
RESULTS: IL-6 levels were higher and IL-10 plasma levels were lower in children
with OSA and returned to control levels after T&A.
CONCLUSIONS: Systemic inflammation is a constitutive component and consequence of
OSA in many children, even in the absence of obesity, and is reversible upon
treatment in most patients.

PMCID: PMC2373984
PMID: 17825619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. In Vivo. 2007 Jul-Aug;21(4):647-50.

Immune and endocrine mechanisms of advanced cancer-related hypercortisolemia.

Lissoni P(1), Brivio F, Fumagalli L, Messina G, Secreto G, Romelli B, Fumagalli
G, Rovelli F, Colciago M, Brera G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Milan, Italy.
p.lissoni@hsgerardo.org

BACKGROUND: Cancer progression depend on the immune and endocrine status of the
patients. In particular, it has been observed that abnormally high levels of
cortisol and/or an altered circadian secretion are associated with a poor
prognosis in advanced cancer patients. The present study was performed to
establish whether cancer-induced hypercortisolemia depends on an activation of
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis or on a direct adrenal stimulation by
inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, which have been proven to induce cortisol
secretion.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study included 50 metastatic solid tumor patients, who 
were evaluated before the onset of chemotherapy. Venous blood samples were
collected in the morning to measure IL-10, IL-6, ACTH and cortisol serum levels. 
Moreover, to analyze its circadian secretion, cortisol levels were also evaluated
on venous blood samples collected at 4.00 p.m.
RESULTS: Abnormally high morning levels of cortisol were observed in 19/50 (38%) 
patients. Moreover, a lack of a normal circadian rhythm of cortisol was seen in
8/50 (16%) patients. None of the patients showed high levels of ACTH. Abnormally 
high concentrations of IL-6 and IL-10 were present in 21/50 (42%) and in 14/50
(28%) patients, respectively. Mean serum levels of both IL-6 and IL-10 were
significantly higher in patients with hypercortisolemia than in those with normal
cortisol values (p<0.005 and p<0.001, respectively). According to previous
clinical studies, these results confirm that the advanced neoplastic disease may 
be associated with enhanced cortisol levels and alterations of its circadian
secretion. The lack of enhanced ACTH secretion excludes the possibility that the 
abnormal cortisol production is due to the activation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis. On the contrary, the evidence of significantly
higher concentrations of IL-6 in hypercortisolemic patients would suggest that
cancer-related enhanced cortisol production may depend on a direct adrenal
stimulation by IL-6 itself The well-demonstrated stimulatory role of cortisol on 
IL-10 production would explain the enhanced IL-10 secretion in hypercortisolemic 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Cancer-related hypercortisolemia would seem to depend on alterations 
of the feedback mechanisms between endocrine and cytokine secretions, occurring
in the neoplastic disease.

PMID: 17708360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Intern Med. 2007 Sep;262(3):375-84.

Impaired cortisol response to acute stressors in patients with coronary disease. 
Implications for inflammatory activity.

Nijm J(1), Kristenson M, Olsson AG, Jonasson L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Högland Hospital, Eksjö, and Department of Medicine
and Care, Division of Cardiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping
University, Linköping, Sweden. johnny@nijm.se

OBJECTIVES: Inflammation is assumed to play a major role in the progress of
atherosclerotic disease. We hypothesized that an altered hypothalamic-pituitary
adrenal (HPA) axis activity was linked to a disinhibited inflammatory activity in
patients with coronary artery disease (CAD).
METHODS: Thirty CAD patients were assessed 12-14 weeks after a first-time acute
coronary syndrome. Serum samples were assayed for C-reactive protein (CRP) and
interleukin-6. Free cortisol was measured in a 24-h urine sample and in repeated 
saliva samples 30 min after awakening and at bedtime. The levels of inflammatory 
markers and cortisol were also determined before and after standardized physical 
and psychological stress tests.
RESULTS: The CAD patients had a higher 24-h cortisol secretion and a flattened
diurnal slope, resulting from significantly higher cortisol levels at bedtime,
compared to clinically healthy controls. The levels of evening cortisol were
strongly related to inflammatory markers in serum. When exposed to acute physical
and psychological stressors, the CAD patients showed a significantly blunted
cortisol response compared to controls. In addition, a stress-induced increase in
CRP was only observed in the patient group.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with CAD exhibited a cortisol pattern that markedly
differed from controls. The data indicate that a dysfunctional HPA axis response 
involves a failure to contain inflammatory activity in CAD patients, thus
providing a possible link between stress and inflammation in disease.

PMID: 17697159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Cardiometab Syndr. 2006 Summer;1(3):204-8.

Relationship between the cardiometabolic syndrome and obstructive sleep apnea.

Schuster SR(1), Tabba M, Sahota P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia, MO, USA.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), characterized by cessation of air flow for a
minimum of 10 seconds despite continuous respiratory effort, is a prevalent
condition in our society. Recent studies demonstrate that OSA is an independent
risk factor for insulin resistance and the cardiometabolic syndrome. Hypoxemia
and sleep fragmentation from OSA appear to produce autonomic activation,
alterations in neuroendocrine function, and increased amounts of inflammatory
cytokines (interleukin 6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha). These variables have
important roles in the pathogenesis of insulin resistance and the cardiometabolic
syndrome. It can be concluded that insulin sensitivity, a key contributor to the 
pathogenesis of the cardiometabolic syndrome, is mainly determined by the extent 
of obesity and, to a lesser extent, by OSA. The authors review OSA and summarize 
recent discoveries and proposed mechanisms of the causal relationship that OSA
has with insulin resistance and the cardiometabolic syndrome independent of many 
confounding comorbidities.

PMID: 17679802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(4):R73.

Diurnal secretion of growth hormone, cortisol, and dehydroepiandrosterone in pre-
and perimenopausal women with active rheumatoid arthritis: a pilot case-control
study.

Blackman MR(1), Muniyappa R, Wilson M, Moquin BE, Baldwin HL, Wong KA, Snyder C, 
Magalnick M, Alli S, Reynolds J, Steinberg SM, Goldbach-Mansky R.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Section, Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine, National Institutes of Health, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Marc.Blackman@va.gov

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is associated with neuroendocrine and immunologic
dysfunction leading to rheumatoid cachexia. Although excess proinflammatory
cytokines can decrease somatotropic axis activity, little is known about the
effects of RA on growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-1 (GH/IGF-I) axis
function. We tested the hypothesis that patients with active RA exhibit decreased
GH/IGF-I axis activity. To do so, we conducted a pilot case-control study at a
clinical research center in 7 pre- and perimenopausal women with active RA and 10
age- and body mass index-matched healthy women. Participants underwent blood
sampling every 20 minutes for 24 hours (8 a.m. to 8 a.m.), and sera were assayed 
for GH, cortisol, and dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA). Sera obtained after
overnight fasting were assayed for IGF-I, IGF-binding protein (IGFBP)-1, IGFBP-3,
C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6), glucose, insulin, and lipids.
Body composition and bone mineral density were evaluated by DEXA (dual emission
x-ray absorptiometry) scans. In patients with RA, mean disease duration was 7.6
+/- 6.8 years, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, and IL-6 were elevated.
GH half-life was shorter than in control subjects (p = 0.0037), with no other
significant group differences in GH deconvolution parameters or approximate
entropy scores. IGF-I (p = 0.05) and IGFBP-3 (p = 0.058) were lower, whereas
IGFBP-1 tended to be higher (p = 0.066), in patients with RA, with
nonsignificantly increased 24-hour total GH production rates. There were no
significant group differences in cortisol or DHEA secretion. Lean body mass was
lower in patients with RA (p = 0.019), particularly in the legs (p = 0.01). Women
with active RA exhibit a trend toward GH insensitivity and relatively diminished 
diurnal cortisol and DHEA secretion for their state of inflammation. Whether
these changes contribute to rheumatoid cachexia remains to be determined.TRIAL
REGISTRATION NUMBER: NCT00034060.

PMCID: PMC2206381
PMID: 17662149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Sleep. 2007 Jun;30(6):729-35.

Inflammation and sleep in healthy individuals.

Mills PJ(1), von Känel R, Norman D, Natarajan L, Ziegler MG, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA. pmills@ucsd.edu

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Inflammation is relatively common in individuals with a sleep
disorder and is associated with quality of sleep. The purpose of this study was
to examine whether inflammation is associated with quality of sleep in healthy
individuals.
DESIGN & SETTING: Observational study in a General Clinical Research Center.
PARTICIPANTS: This study characterized inflammation and polysomno-graphically
verified sleep in 124 African American and Caucasian American women and men
without a sleep disorder.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Circulating levels of 3 markers and/or mediators of
inflammation known to be elevated in sleep disorders and in cardiovascular
disease were determined (interleukin-6 [IL-6] endothelin-1 [ET-1], soluble
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 [sICAM-1]). Sleep was characterized by
polysomnography. Multiple linear regression analyses showed that increasing age, 
male sex, and African American ethnicity were independently associated with
poorer sleep. After controlling for these variables, higher levels of ET-1 were
independently associated with greater sleep latency (P < or = 0.01), greater
rapid eye movement (REM) latency (P < or = 0.01), more slow wave sleep (P < or = 
0.05), and less stage 1 sleep (P < or = 0.01). Higher IL-6 levels were
independently associated with greater REM latency (P < or = 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that, in individuals without a known sleep
disorder, ET-1, a potent vasoconstrictor and mediator of inflammation, is
associated with more deep sleep, whereas both ET-1 and IL-6 are associated with
increased latency of sleep and of REM. The findings underscore the complex
relationships between peripheral markers of inflammation and sleep.

PMCID: PMC1978353
PMID: 17580594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Clin Sleep Med. 2005 Jul 15;1(3):266-70.

Nasal cytology: a marker of clinically silent inflammation in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea and a predictor of noncompliance with nasal CPAP therapy.

Shadan FF(1), Jalowayski AA, Fahrenholz J, Kline LE, Dawson A.

Author information: 
(1)Scripps Clinic Sleep Center, La Jolla, CA 92037-1027, USA.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Patients with obstructive sleep apnea treated with nasal
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) often complain of nasal side effects. 
We studied patients before and after initiation of nasal CPAP to see how
treatment affected nasal function and markers of nasal inflammation. We searched 
for pretreatment findings that might help to predict noncompliance.
METHODS: Nasal symptom scores, nasal flow by anterior rhinomanometry, mediator
levels (intercellular adhesion molecule-1, interleukin-6, interleukin-8 and
interleukin-13), and nasal scrapes for cytology were obtained at baseline and
monthly for up to 3 months of nasal CPAP therapy. Compliance was assessed from
the patient's report and by recording hours of usage for up to 19 months of
follow-up.
RESULTS: Thirty-eight patients with newly diagnosed obstructive sleep apnea were 
classified as having no rhinitis (42%), allergic rhinitis (37%), or nonallergic
rhinitis (21%). There was no significant difference in compliance in patients
with and without rhinitis. Compliant and noncompliant patients showed no
significant differences in their baseline nasal symptom scores, nasal flow, and
mediator levels. Nasal neutrophil counts before treatment were greater in
noncompliant than in compliant patients (p = .004) and greater in those
discontinuing because of nasal symptoms than in patients who quit for other
reasons (p = .05). There was a positive correlation between neutrophil counts and
nasal bacterial scores, both before and after treatment with nasal CPAP.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with increased neutrophil counts in the nasal scrape before
beginning nasal CPAP are at increased risk of discontinuing therapy. They appear 
to have subclinical nasal inflammation that cannot be identified from clinical
assessment, nasal symptom scores or rhinomanometry.

PMID: 17566187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2007 Aug;120(2):366-73. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Repeat organic dust exposure-induced monocyte inflammation is associated with
protein kinase C activity.

Poole JA(1), Wyatt TA, Von Essen SG, Hervert J, Parks C, Mathisen T, Romberger
DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy Section, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, 985300 The Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-5300, USA. japoole@unmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Organic dust exposure results in an inflammatory response that
attenuates over time, but repetitive exposures can result in chronic respiratory 
diseases. Mechanisms underlying this modulated response are not clear.
OBJECTIVE: This study investigated the effects of repeat versus single organic
dust exposure-induced inflammatory mediators and protein kinase C (PKC) activity 
in monocytes.
METHODS: Settled organic dust was obtained from swine confinement facilities.
Promonocytic THP-1 cells and human peripheral blood monocytes were pretreated
with or without dust extract and then restimulated. Culture supernatants were
evaluated for TNF-alpha, IL-6, CXCL8, and IL-10. Responses were compared with
endotoxin-depleted dust, LPS, and peptidoglycan. PKC isoform (alpha, delta,
epsilon, zeta) activation was evaluated by direct kinase activity. PKC isoform
inhibitors' effects on TNF-alpha secretion were studied.
RESULTS: Single exposure to organic dust stimulated monocyte secretion of
TNF-alpha, IL-6, CXCL8, and IL-10 compared with unstimulated cells. TNF-alpha and
IL-6 were diminished in pretreated cells restimulated with dust. Secretion of
CXCL8 and IL-10 remained persistently elevated. TNF-alpha responses were retained
after marked depletion of endotoxin. Dust exposure induced significant PKC alpha,
delta, epsilon, and zeta activation, peaking at 30 to 60 minutes. PKC isoform
activation was attenuated in repeat exposed cells. Inhibition of PKCalpha and
PKCepsilon reduced dust-induced TNF-alpha secretion.
CONCLUSION: Repeat organic dust exposure modulated inflammatory mediator
production in monocytes independent of endotoxin. The inability of PKC to be
reactivated may account for this observation.
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Targeting PKC and specific mediators associated with
repetitive organic dust exposure may result in novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 17555806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Nov;21(8):1063-74. Epub 2007 Jun 1.

Longitudinal analysis of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokine production in
severely fatigued adolescents.

ter Wolbeek M(1), van Doornen LJ, Kavelaars A, van de Putte EM, Schedlowski M,
Heijnen CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3508
AB Utrecht, The Netherlands.

In the adolescent population, fatigue is associated with somatic complaints,
unrefreshing sleep, cognitive disturbances and symptoms of depression and
anxiety. This pattern of symptoms resembles the one described in chronic fatigue 
syndrome (CFS). Since immunological alterations have been reported in CFS
patients, we wondered whether also severely fatigued girls from a healthy
population would show comparable alterations in psychological and immunological
parameters. We tested this hypothesis in a longitudinal design, allowing a
reliable assessment of the participants' characteristic immune status. Groups of 
severely fatigued (N=67) and non-fatigued (N=61) participants were selected.
Severely fatigued girls reported more depressive symptoms, anxiety, reduced sleep
quality, and somatic and CFS-related symptoms than non-fatigued participants
across three measurements during one year (T1: spring, T2: autumn, T3: spring).
In contrast, no group differences in mitogen-induced cytokine production or
T-cell proliferation in vitro or in leukocyte subset counts were observed.
Although absolute cytokine production and cell counts were affected by seasonal
variation, the within-subject values, relatively to the rest of the participants,
were fairly stable. Data from a small group of CFS patients (N=11) showed
similarities in self-reported complaints between CFS patients and fatigued
participants. Interestingly, CFS patients showed a distinct immune profile when
compared to the severely fatigued or non-fatigued participants, i.e. increased
levels of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10, decreased IFN-gamma/IL-10 ratio)
and reduced levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6, TNF-alpha) over all three
time points analyzed. These results show that, although overlap in symptomatology
between the general population and patients with CFS was observed, only CFS
patients show a skewing of the cytokine balance towards an anti-inflammatory
profile.

PMID: 17544255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Sleep Res. 2007 Jun;16(2):217-25.

The effect of short-term withdrawal from continuous positive airway pressure
therapy on sympathetic activity and markers of vascular inflammation in subjects 
with obstructive sleep apnoea.

Phillips CL(1), Yang Q, Williams A, Roth M, Yee BJ, Hedner JA, Berend N,
Grunstein RR.

Author information: 
(1)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia. cphillips@mail.usyd.edu.au

Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is commonly associated with cardiovascular disease
and sympathetic activation. However, it is unclear whether this association is
independent of obesity and to what extent treatment with nasal continuous
positive airway pressure (CPAP) alleviates the vascular inflammation that
underpins cardiovascular disease. We therefore evaluated whether short-term
withdrawal from CPAP therapy in subjects with moderate-severe OSA would result in
increased levels of sympathetic activity and circulating inflammatory cytokines
independent of weight. Vascular inflammatory markers (hsCRP, hsIL-6 and
hsTNF-alpha) were assessed in 20 subjects after one and seven nights of
withdrawal from CPAP together with the hypoxia-responsive angiogenic marker VEGF 
and urinary catecholamines. Compared with baseline on CPAP, withdrawal from
therapy resulted in an immediate return of OSA with an increase in RDI to 26.7
+/- 5.2 and 39.0 +/- 5.9 events per hour after one and seven nights without CPAP,
respectively (both P < 0.0001). This was accompanied by a concomitant rise in
daytime urinary noradrenaline (P < 0.0001) after seven nights CPAP withdrawal
that was positively associated with the severity of hypoxaemia. In contrast,
withdrawal from CPAP therapy was not accompanied by any change in measured
cytokines or VEGF (all P > 0.1). In conclusion, 1 week of CPAP withdrawal was
associated with a return of OSA and a marked increase in sympathetic activity
without a concomitant elevation of vascular inflammatory markers.

PMID: 17542952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Sleep Res. 2007 Jun;16(2):188-97.

The association between children's sleep disruption and salivary interleukin-6.

El-Sheikh M(1), Buckhalt JA, Granger DA, Erath SA, Acebo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Development and Family Studies, Auburn University, Auburn,
AL, USA. elshemm@auburn.edu

We explored relations between children's sleep and levels of salivary
interleukin-6 (IL-6). Children were healthy boys (n = 28) and girls (n = 36) who 
ranged in age between 8 and 9 years. Through actigraphy, the amount and quality
of children's sleep was examined objectively in their homes for 1 week. Children 
also rated their Morningness/Eveningness predisposition and subjective
sleepiness, and parents reported on their children's Sleep Disordered Breathing
and Sleepiness. Children provided saliva samples before and after a series of
cognitive/social tasks (an intelligence test, listening to a marital argument,
and performing a star-tracing task), which were later assayed for IL-6. Children 
with higher salivary IL-6 levels reported increased Eveningness predispositions
and their parents reported higher levels of Sleep Disordered Breathing.
Furthermore, lower levels of sleepiness, longer sleep amount, and better quality 
sleep in children were each predictive of increased IL-6 reactivity from pre- to 
post-task conditions. The findings illustrate (for the first time to our
knowledge) that sleep disruptions in otherwise healthy and normally developing
children may be associated with individual differences in levels of IL-6 in
saliva.

PMID: 17542949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Endocrine. 2006 Dec;30(3):371-6.

Interleukin-6 production and deregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
axis in patients with major depressive disorders.

Humphreys D(1), Schlesinger L, Lopez M, Araya AV.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology (INTA), University of Chile,
Santiago, Chile.

The present study was designed to determine whether an association exists between
HPA activity and cytokine production in major depression (MD). In 9 patients with
MD and 11 control subjects of both sexes, all drug-free, activity of the HPA axis
was evaluated by circadian rhythm of plasma cortisol, 24-h free urinary cortisol,
an overnight 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test, and an oCRF stimulation test.
Spontaneous and LPS-stimulated production of IL-1beta, IL-6, and TNFalpha by
peripheral blood mononuclear cells were also determined. We found a significantly
elevated spontaneous production of IL-6 in patients with MD (3541.2 +/- 726.8 vs 
380.4 +/- 77.5 pg/mL in controls, p < 0.05), while LPS-stimulated production was 
significantly lower in patients than in control subjects (19,867.7 +/- 3649.2 vs 
33,142.2 +/- 15,47.2 pg/mL, p < 0.05). The adrenocorticotropic hormone response
to oCRF, evaluated as the area under the curve (AUCACTH) was significantly lower 
in patients than in control subjects (p = 0.02). A positive correlation between
AUCACTH and LPS-stimulated IL-6 secretion was observed in patients with MD (r =
0.75, p < 0.05) but not in controls. These findings suggest that the activation
of the inflammatory response described in depression might be associated with
long-term hyperactivity of the HPA axis.

PMID: 17526950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Nov;21(8):1050-7. Epub 2007 May 23.

The effects of 40 hours of total sleep deprivation on inflammatory markers in
healthy young adults.

Frey DJ(1), Fleshner M, Wright KP Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep and Chronobiology Laboratory, Department of Integrative Physiology,
Center for Neuroscience, University of Colorado at Boulder, Clare Small, Room
114, Campus Box 354, Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Inflammatory cytokines are released in response to stress, tissue damage, and
infection. Acutely, this response is adaptive; however, chronic elevation of
inflammatory proteins can contribute to health problems including cardiovascular,
endocrine, mood, and sleep disorders. Few studies have examined how sleep
deprivation acutely affects inflammatory markers, which was the aim of the
current study. Nineteen healthy men and women aged 28.05+/-8.56 (mean+/-SD) were 
totally sleep deprived for 40 h under constant routine conditions.
Pro-inflammatory markers: intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1), E-selectin,
vascular adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), c-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6
(IL-6), and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), and the anti-inflammatory cytokine
interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra) were assayed in plasma. Daytime levels
during baseline (hours 1-15 of scheduled wakefulness) were compared to daytime
levels during sleep deprivation (hours 25-39 of scheduled wakefulness), thus
controlling for circadian phase within an individual. Repeated measures ANOVA
with planned comparisons showed that 40 h of total sleep deprivation induced a
significant increase in E-selectin, ICAM-1, IL-1beta, and IL-1ra, a significant
decrease in CRP and IL-6, and no significant change in VCAM-1. Alterations in
circulating levels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines and cell adhesion
molecules during sleep deprivation were consistent with both increased and
decreased inflammation. These findings suggest that one night of sleep loss
triggers a stress response that includes stimulation of both pro- and
anti-inflammatory proteins in the healthy young subjects tested under our
experimental conditions.

PMID: 17524614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Epilepsia. 2007 Sep;48(9):1739-49. Epub 2007 May 23.

Intravenous immunoglobulins in refractory childhood-onset epilepsy: effects on
seizure frequency, EEG activity, and cerebrospinal fluid cytokine profile.

Billiau AD(1), Witters P, Ceulemans B, Kasran A, Wouters C, Lagae L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Transplantation, University of Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

PURPOSE: Several studies have reported favorable effects of intravenous
immunoglobulins (IVIG) in refractory epilepsy. Evidence substantiating an
immunomodulatory action is scarce. In an open-label study, we prospectively
investigated the effect of IVIG on clinical, EEG and serum/CSF immunological
parameters in patients with refractory childhood-onset epilepsy.
METHODS: Thirteen patients (median age 6.9 years; range 1.6-25.8) with refractory
seizures despite 3-4 antiepileptic drug regimens were given IVIG (Sandoglobulin, 
ZLB-Behring, add-on, 4 x 400 mg/kg/3 weeks). Seizure frequency, 24-h video-EEG,
and CSF/serum immunological parameters and cytokine profiles
(IL-6/IL-8/IL-12/IL-10) were documented before and after completion of the
course.
RESULTS: Seizure frequency was reduced by > or = 50% in four, and by 25%-50% in
three patients. In contrast, variation in automatically recorded spike counts
(1-h-wake and -sleep) did not correlate with clinical improvement. Serum
immunological parameters showed variable deviations in eight patients (e.g.,
IgG(2) deficiency) and CSF immunoblotting showed oligoclonal bands in two
patients. Blood-brain barrier permeability was normal in 12 patients. IL-6 and
IL-8 were clearly detectable in CSF of all patients; the levels were
significantly higher than those in plasma but remained unaffected by IVIG
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite unchanged EEG spike counts, substantial reductions in
seizure frequency occurred in 7 of 13 patients, suggesting that IVIG hinder
progression of central epileptic activity into clinical seizures. Intrathecal
presence of IL-8 and IL-6 was documented in all patients, but was unaffected by
IVIG, suggesting that their production is directly related to electrical seizure 
activity and that IVIG may act through interference with immune pathways
downstream to IL-6 and IL-8.

PMID: 17521345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Ind Health. 2007 Apr;45(2):296-300.

Subjective poor sleep and white blood cell count in male Japanese workers.

Nishitani N(1), Sakakibara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nursing, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, 
Japan.

Sleep deprivation has been shown to be associated with an increase in
inflammatory makers such as interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein. The purpose of 
the present study was to investigate the relation between subjective poor sleep
and white blood cell (WBC) count, an inflammatory marker. The subjects were 208
male Japanese workers in a synthetic fiber-manufacturing plant, who responded to 
a cross-sectional survey of a questionnaire on basic attributes, life style, and 
sleep. All male workers in the plant took an annual health checkup. WBC count was
also examined in the checkup. The WBC count was greater in shift workers than in 
daytime workers. Shift workers complained of poor sleep more frequently, though
their sleeping hours were longer. Multiple regression analysis showed that poor
sleep as well as smoking habit, BMI and age were independent factors for an
increase in WBC count, while sleeping hours and work pattern (shift work) were
not significant factors. The present finding that poor sleep was associated with 
higher WBC count in male workers might suggest the importance of quality of
sleep, particularly among shift workers.

PMID: 17485874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2007 Mar;58 Suppl 1:65-76.

Adiponectin, resistin and subclinical inflammation--the metabolic burden in
Launois Bensaude Syndrome, a rare form of obesity.

Harsch IA(1), Bergmann T, Koebnick C, Wiedmann R, Ruderich F, Hahn EG, Konturek
PC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Department I, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
igor.harsch@med1.imed.uni-erlangen.de

The aim of the study was to investigate, whether the degree of metabolic risk
factors for atherosclerotic complications in a very rare kind of obesity, the
Multiple Symmetrical Lipomatosis, also known as the Launois-Bensaude Syndrome
(LBS), are comparable or different from "simple" truncal obesity. 10 patients
with LBS (Body mass index 34.4 +/- 1.8 kg/m(2), age: 62 +/- 3 yrs) were compared 
with 19 BMI - matched patients with "simple" truncal obesity and obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) and 20 BMI- matched patients with "simple" truncal
obesity without OSAS. Markers of subclinical inflammation and thrombocyte
activation (sCD62p = soluble p-selectin, highly sensitive C-Reactive protein =
CRP, Interleukin-6 = IL-6, ICAM-1 = Intracellular Adhesion Molecule-1, Vascular
Cell Adhesion Molecule = VCAM -1, leptin), as well as adiponectin and resistin
were studied. The prevalence of atherogenic risk factors as hypertension (80%),
type 2 diabetes (30%), OSAS (50%), smoking (30%) and alcohol abuse (80%) was high
in the (obese) LBS group. The markers of subclinical inflammation and thrombocyte
activation showed an indifferent picture with lower levels of circulating IL-6
and sCD62p, comparable CRP and higher ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 than in controls. Leptin 
and adiponectin were higher than in controls. However, the accumulation of
"classic" cardiovascular risk factors in the LBS group was well reflected by the 
presence of symptomatic cardiovascular disease in 3 of the 10 LBS patients,
putting LBS patients - if obese - at an atherosclerotic risk at least comparable 
to obese persons.

PMID: 17443028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):R145-51. Epub 2007 Apr
11.

Sex differences in monocyte expression of IL-6: role of autonomic mechanisms.

O'Connor MF(1), Motivala SJ, Valladares EM, Olmstead R, Irwin MR.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA Semel Institute for
Neuroscience and Human Behavior, University of California-Los Angeles, 300
Medical Plaza, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7076, USA. mfoconnor@mednet.ucla.edu

Sex differences in the prevalence of inflammatory disorders exist, perhaps due to
sex differences in cellular mechanisms that contribute to proinflammatory
cytokine activity. This study analyzed sex differences of monocyte intracellular 
expression of IL-6 and its associations with reproductive hormones and autonomic 
mechanisms in 14 matched pairs of men and women (n = 28). Monocyte intracellular 
IL-6 production was repeatedly assessed over two circadian periods. Sympathetic
balance was estimated by heart rate variability and the ratio of power in the
low-frequency (LF) to high-frequency (HF); vagal tone was indexed by the power of
HF component. As compared to men, women showed greater monocyte expression of
IL-6 across the circadian period. In addition, women showed lower sympathetic
balance (LF/HF ratio), and greater levels of vagal tone (HF power). In women, but
not men, sympathovagal balance was negatively associated with monocyte IL-6
expression, whereas vagal tone was positively associated with production of this 
cytokine. Levels of reproductive hormones were not related to monocyte IL-6
expression. The marked increase in monocyte expression of interleukin-6 in women 
has implications for understanding sex differences in risk of inflammatory
disorders. Additionally, these data suggest that sex differences in sympathovagal
balance or vagal tone may be a pathway to explain sex differences in IL-6
expression. Interventions that target autonomic mechanisms might constitute new
strategies to constrain IL-6 production with impacts on inflammatory disease risk
in women.

PMID: 17428894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Psychosom Med. 2007 Apr;69(3):217-24. Epub 2007 Mar 30.

Depressive symptoms, omega-6:omega-3 fatty acids, and inflammation in older
adults.

Kiecolt-Glaser JK(1), Belury MA, Porter K, Beversdorf DQ, Lemeshow S, Glaser R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Ohio State University College of Medicine, 1670
Upham Drive, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Kiecolt-Glaser.1@osu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To address how interactions between polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) 
levels and depressive symptoms were related to proinflammatory cytokine
synthesis. Depression and stress promote proinflammatory cytokine production.
Dietary intakes of omega-3 (n-3) and omega-6 (n-6) PUFAs also influence
inflammation; high n-6:n-3 ratios enhance proinflammatory cytokine production,
although n-3 has anti-inflammatory properties.
METHODS: Blood samples from 43 older adults (mean age = 66.67 years, SD = 10.09) 
provided data on PUFAs and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, interleukin (IL)-6,
and IL-6 soluble receptor (sIL-6r). Depressive symptoms were assessed by the
Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale.
RESULTS: Depressive symptoms and n-6:n-3 ratios worked together to enhance
proinflammatory cytokines beyond the contribution provided by either variable
alone, with substantial variance explained by their interaction: 13% for IL-6 and
31% for TNF-alpha, whereas full models accounted for 18% and 40%, respectively.
Although predicted cytokine levels were consistent across n-6:n-3 ratios with low
depressive symptoms, higher n-6:n-3 ratios were associated with progressively
elevated TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels as depressive symptoms increased. Higher
levels of sIL-6r were associated with higher n-6:n-3 ratios. Six individuals who 
met the criteria for major depressive disorder had higher n-6:n-3 ratios and
TNF-alpha, IL-6, and sIL-6r levels than those who did not meet the criteria;
excluding these six individuals reduced the variance explained by the depressive 
symptoms and n-6:n-3 ratio interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: Diets with high n-6:n-3 PUFA ratios may enhance the risk for both
depression and inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC2856352
PMID: 17401057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Sleep. 2007 Jan;30(1):29-34.

C-reactive protein is associated with sleep disordered breathing independent of
adiposity.

Punjabi NM(1), Beamer BA.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Department of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Comment in
    Sleep. 2007 Jun;30(6):679; discussion 680.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: It is well established that medical conditions such as obesity 
and cardiovascular disease are associated with increased levels of inflammatory
biomarkers such as C-reactive protein (CRP). Prior studies have produced
inconsistent results regarding the association between sleep disordered breathing
(SDB) and CRP, possibly due to the confounding effects of obesity or medical
comorbidity. The present study examined the association between degree of SDB and
level of CRP independent of prevalent medical conditions and obesity.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SUBJECTS AND SETTING: University-based clinical sample referred for diagnostic
polysomnography.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: The study sample consisted of 69 men (mean age 40
years; mean BMI of 31.2 kg/m2) free of prevalent medical conditions including
hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and cardiovascular disease. Measurements of
morning and evening CRP levels were performed along with full-montage
polysomnography. Confounding due to obesity was assessed by adjustments for body 
mass index, waist circumference, and percent body fat. A strong association was
found between degree of SDB and serum levels of CRP, with or without adjustment
for age and several measures of adiposity. Between the lowest and highest
quartiles of apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) the mean difference in adjusted level of 
CRP was 3.88 microg/ml (P < 0.001). Moreover, an independent association between 
serum CRP levels and nocturnal hypoxia was also observed, whereas no association 
was noted with parameters of sleep architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: While more research is needed to elucidate causal pathways involving
the effects of sleep-related hypoxia on low-grade systemic inflammation, the
results of this study suggest that mechanisms other than adiposity per se could
contribute to the inflammatory state seen in adults with SDB.

PMCID: PMC1978354
PMID: 17310862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Sleep Breath. 2007 Sep;11(3):177-85.

Inflammatory proteins in patients with obstructive sleep apnea with and without
daytime sleepiness.

Bravo Mde L(1), Serpero LD, Barceló A, Barbé F, Agustí A, Gozal D.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario Son Dureta, Servicio de Neumología, Palma de Mallorca, 
Baleares 07014, Spain.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) is one of the most frequent symptoms in
patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). However, not all patients 
with OSAS manifest EDS. The aim of this study was to assess whether differential 
circulatory levels of inflammatory mediators would account for differences in
somnolence among patients with OSAS. Patients were prospectively recruited from
referral patient cohort to the university hospital sleep center. A total of 50
consecutive patients with OSAS undergoing overnight polysomnography with or
without EDS and 20 controls were evaluated. EDS was assessed using the Epworth
sleepiness scale (ESS) and the multiple sleep latency test after overnight
polysomnography. EDS was defined when the ESS was >10 and the mean sleep latency 
<10 min. Fasting blood was drawn in the morning after polysomnography.
Circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), interleukin-6
(IL-6), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1), 8-isoprostaglandin F2alpha
(8-iso-PGF2alpha), and P-selectin were measured with commercially available high 
sensitivity kits. Although patients with OSAS have elevated levels of ICAM-1,
IL-6, and TNFalpha, there were no statistically significant differences in any of
the inflammatory mediators between patients with EDS and without EDS. Emergence
of EDS in the context of OSA does not appear to result from the selective
increase of any particular somnogenic substance, i.e., TNFalpha, IL-6, ICAM-1,
8-iso-PGF2alpha, and P-selectin in the context of sleep-disordered breathing.

PMID: 17279423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Scand J Immunol. 2007 Jan;65(1):99-105.

Inflammatory cytokines in relation to adrenal response following total hip
replacement.

Bjornsson GL(1), Thorsteinsson L, Gudmundsson KO, Jonsson H Jr, Gudmundsson S,
Gudbjornsson B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Rheumatology Research, Landspitali-University Hospital, Reykjavik, 
Iceland.

Our objective was to investigate the initiation and course of pro- and
anti-inflammatory cytokines in early inflammatory response and to elucidate the
cytokine system in relation to the adrenal response caused by stress. Seven blood
samples were collected, pre- and postoperatively (0-72 h) after total hip
replacement (THR) due to osteoarthritis. The following cytokines were measured
using Cytometric Bead Array: interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), IL-6, tumour necrosis 
factor-alpha, IL-8, IL-12 and IL-10 (B&D). Thirteen patients took part in the
study (67 +/- 9 years). C-reactive protein increased from <6 to over 200 mg/l on 
the second post-op day. The concentration of IL-6 increased 10-fold just 3 h
post-op (4-47 pg/ml) and reached its maximum value 6 h post-op (77 pg/ml;
Wilcoxon test P < 0.01) Repeated measurements were also significant (Friedman P <
0.05). The concentration of IL-8 doubled the day of surgery but did not reach a
significant level (Friedman test =0.069). None of the other cytokines showed any 
significant changes. The diurnal cortisol rhythm was interrupted after the
surgery and there was a significant correlation between the cortisol secretion
and IL-6 response. This study demonstrates an isolated elevation in IL-6 levels
with only a minor elevation in IL-8 following THR. This pro-inflammatory response
seemed to decline without activation of anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-10), but 
cortisol seemed to play a complicated role in halting the acute inflammatory
response.

PMID: 17212773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Sleep Breath. 2007 Jun;11(2):77-84.

Hypoxemia and obesity modulate plasma C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 levels
in sleep-disordered breathing.

Tauman R(1), O'Brien LM, Gozal D.

Author information: 
(1)Kosair Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of Louisville,
Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) are pro-inflammatory proteins
and important risk factors for atherosclerosis. Plasma CRP levels in snoring
children may or may not be elevated. Since obesity is prevalent among snoring
children and is associated with elevated CRP levels, we aimed to investigate the 
relative contributions of sleep-disordered breathing (SDB) and obesity to the
inflammatory processes in snoring children in this prospective study. Two hundred
forty-four children (mean age 8.9 +/- 3.4 years) underwent polysomnographic
evaluation. CRP was measured the following morning, and plasma IL-6 levels from
111 randomly selected children were also examined. Plasma CRP and IL-6 levels
were elevated in children with SDB. Log plasma CRP levels were higher in the
moderate-severe SDB group (apnea/hypopnea index, AHI > or = 5) compared to the
mild SDB group (AHI > or = 1 and <5; p < 0.0001) or the control group (AHI < 1; p
= 0.0001). Log plasma CRP levels correlated with AHI, arousal index, relative
BMI, and SpO(2) nadir (r = 0.30, p < 0.0001; r = 0.21, p = 0.002; r = 0.39, p <
0.0001, r = -0.36, p < 0.0001, respectively). Log plasma CRP levels were lower in
children with SpO(2) nadir > or =90 (p < 0.0001). Sub-analysis of the 116
non-obese children in the cohort revealed similar findings. Log plasma IL-6
levels were increased in children with moderate-severe SDB compared to controls
(p = 0.03) and correlated with AHI (r = 0.28, p = 0.003) and SpO(2) nadir (r =
-0.24, p = 0.02). Children with SDB display significant severity-dependent
increases in plasma CRP and IL-6 levels independent of obesity.

PMID: 17171553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Sleep Med. 2007 Jan;8(1):5-7. Epub 2006 Dec 6.

Metabolic abnormalities in obesity and sleep apnea are in a continuum.

Basta M, Vgontzas AN.

Comment on
    Sleep Med. 2007 Jan;8(1):12-7.

PMID: 17157061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Fertil Steril. 2007 Jan;87(1):136-42. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Increased cortisol responsivity to adrenocorticotropic hormone and low plasma
levels of interleukin-1 receptor antagonist in women with functional hypothalamic
amenorrhea.

Lindahl MS(1), Olovsson M, Nyberg S, Thorsen K, Olsson T, Sundström Poromaa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Uppsala University Hospital,
Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis at all levels,
to determine the origin of the previously reported hypercortisolism in patients
with functional hypothalamic amenorrhea. A secondary aim was to evaluate factors 
outside the central nervous system which are known to affect the HPA axis, i.e., 
circulating levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-1 receptor antagonist
(IL-1Ra), and fat mass-adjusted leptin levels, in patients with functional
hypothalamic amenorrhea and healthy controls.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden.
PATIENTS: Fifteen subjects with hypothalamic amenorrhea, and 14 age- and
weight-matched controls.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We collected blood samples four times during a 24-hour
interval for analysis of cortisol, leptin, IL-1Ra, and IL-6 levels. We performed 
a low-dose oral dexamethasone test and a low-dose ACTH test. We measured body-fat
percentage using a dual-energy X-ray absorptiometer.
RESULTS: Patients with hypothalamic amenorrhea had increased diurnal cortisol
levels (P<.001). The cortisol response to intravenous low-dose ACTH was increased
in functional hypothalamic amenorrhea patients compared to control subjects
(P<.01), but they had similar rates of dexamethasone suppression. Patients with
hypothalamic amenorrhea also had decreased diurnal leptin (P<.05), and decreased 
diurnal IL-1Ra levels (P<.05), compared to controls. Body-fat percentage was the 
main predictor of leptin levels.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests novel links for the development of
functional hypothalamic amenorrhea, including increased adrenal responsiveness
and impairments in proinflammatory cytokine pathways.

PMID: 17094981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Feb;320(2):507-15. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Cocaine dependence and acute cocaine induce decreases of monocyte proinflammatory
cytokine expression across the diurnal period: autonomic mechanisms.

Irwin MR(1), Olmos L, Wang M, Valladares EM, Motivala SJ, Fong T, Newton T, Butch
A, Olmstead R, Cole SW.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-7057, USA. mirwin1@ucla.edu

Cocaine dependence is associated with an increased risk of infectious diseases.
The innate immune system triggers effector pathways to combat microbial pathogens
through expression of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6
(IL-6). It is not known whether cocaine alters the capacity of monocytes to
respond to a bacterial challenge in humans. In cocaine-dependent volunteers and
control subjects, we analyzed monocyte TNF-alpha and IL-6 expression at rest and 
in response to the bacterial ligand, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), over a 24-h
period. In addition, the in vivo effects of cocaine (40 mg) versus placebo on
monocyte expression of TNF-alpha and IL-6 were profiled over 48 h.
Cocaine-dependent volunteers showed a decrease in the capacity of monocytes to
express TNF-alpha and IL-6 compared with control subjects. Moreover, acute
infusion of cocaine induced a further decline in the responsiveness of monocytes 
to LPS, which persisted after cocaine had cleared from the blood. Heart rate
variability analyses showed that increases of sympathetic activity along with
vagal withdrawal were associated with decreases in monocyte expression of
TNF-alpha. Cocaine alters autonomic activity and induces protracted decreases in 
innate immune mechanisms. Targeting sympathovagal balance might represent a novel
strategy for partial amelioration of impairments of innate immunity in cocaine
dependence.

PMID: 17068203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Mar;21(3):301-7. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Infection-induced proinflammatory cytokines are associated with decreases in
positive affect, but not increases in negative affect.

Janicki-Deverts D(1), Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Turner RB, Treanor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
djanicki@andrew.cmu.edu

Infection commonly triggers nonspecific psychological and behavioral changes
including fatigue and malaise, anhedonia, inability to concentrate, and disturbed
sleep that collectively are termed "sickness behaviors". Converging evidence from
several lines of research implicate the activities of proinflammatory cytokines
as a cause of sickness behaviors. Here we elaborate upon the findings of previous
research by examining whether infection-associated elevations in local
proinflammatory cytokines are associated with increased negative mood and
decreased positive mood. One hundred and eighty-nine healthy adults were
experimentally exposed to rhinovirus or influenza virus during a 6-day period of 
quarantine. Infection, objective signs of illness, nasal IL-1beta, IL-6, and
TNF-alpha, and self-reported affect were assessed at baseline and on each of the 
five post-challenge quarantine days. In the 153 persons who became infected
following exposure to the challenge virus, daily production of IL-6, but not
IL-1beta or TNF-alpha, was associated with reduced concurrent daily positive
affect. One-day lagged analyses showed that daily production of all three
cytokines was related to lower positive affect on the next day. All lagged
associations were independent of previous-day positive affect and objective signs
of illness (mucus production, mucociliary clearance function). There were no
associations between cytokines and negative affect. Findings support a causal
association between pathogen-induced local cytokine production and changes in
positive affect over a 24-h timeline.

PMCID: PMC2700714
PMID: 17055218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer. 2006 Dec 1;107(11):2723-9.

Biomarkers of depression in cancer patients.

Jehn CF(1), Kuehnhardt D, Bartholomae A, Pfeiffer S, Krebs M, Regierer AC, Schmid
P, Possinger K, Flath BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Charite, Berlin,
Germany. christian.jehn@charite.de

BACKGROUND: Inflammation and perturbation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
(HPA) axis function appears to play a putative role in the etiology of
depression. Patients with metastatic cancer demonstrate elevated prevalence rates
for depression. The objective of the current study was to illustrate the efficacy
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and HPA axis function as adjuncts to support the
diagnosis of depression in cancer patients.
METHODS: Plasma concentrations of IL-6 and cortisol were measured in 114 cancer
patients with and without depression. The relative diurnal variation of cortisol 
(cortisol VAR), expressed as a percentage, was calculated. Receiver operating
characteristics analysis was performed.
RESULTS: Depression was associated with increased plasma concentrations of IL-6
(18.7 pg/mL vs. 2.7 pg/mL; P < .001) and higher cortisol concentrations at 8 AM
and 8 PM. The relative cortisol VAR (11.7% vs. 60.6%, respectively; P < .001) was
found to be decreased in cancer patients with depression, indicating a disturbed 
circadian function of the HPA axis. As a biomarker of depression, IL-6 yielded at
a cutoff value of 10.6 pg/mL, a sensitivity of 79%, and a specificity of 87%
(area under the curve [AUC] = 0.86; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 0.78-0.94),
whereas cortisol VAR demonstrated a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 88%
(AUC = 0.85; 95% CI, 0.74-0.97) at a cutoff value of 33.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression is associated with increased plasma IL-6 concentrations
in patients with cancer. These patients demonstrate a dysfunction of the
HPA-axis, characterized by a decreased diurnal variation of cortisol. The high
sensitivity and specificity of these parameters biomarkers of depression make
IL-6 and cortisol VAR helpful tools in the diagnosis of depression in patients
with cancer.

(c) 2006 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 17036362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Brain Behav Immun. 2007 Feb;21(2):229-37. Epub 2006 Sep 22.

Depressive symptoms and production of proinflammatory cytokines by peripheral
blood mononuclear cells stimulated in vitro.

Cyranowski JM(1), Marsland AL, Bromberger JT, Whiteside TL, Chang Y, Matthews KA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Psychology, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. cyranowskijm@msx.upmc.edu

One potential pathway by which depression may impact health is through modulation
of immune function. Depressed individuals have been shown to display reductions
in measures of cellular immune competence as well as elevated markers of systemic
inflammation. The current study assessed the in vitro production of
proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha by peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in response to mitogen stimulation within a
community-based sample of 79 midlife women. Results indicate that midlife women
with higher levels of depressive symptoms (as assessed with the Center for
Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale) and greater body mass index (BMI)
displayed diminished production of IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha by stimulated
PBMCs, as compared with their less-depressed counterparts. These relationships
remained after controlling for such health-related variables as age, recent sleep
disruption, physical activity level, and self-reported medical history. In
contrast, depressive symptoms were not significantly associated with circulating 
levels of the same proinflammatory cytokines (IL-6, IL-1beta, and TNF-alpha)
obtained from serum samples available for a subset of 62 of the study
participants. Moreover, circulating proinflammatory cytokine levels were not
significantly associated with the in vitro proinflammatory cytokine production
outcomes. Further research is needed to clarify the clinical significance of the 
current study findings, and the extent to which in vitro tests of stimulated
proinflammatory cytokine production are associated with other measures of
cellular immune function and/or circulating markers of systemic inflammation
obtained across various study populations.

PMID: 16996242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Arch Intern Med. 2006 Sep 18;166(16):1756-62.

Sleep deprivation and activation of morning levels of cellular and genomic
markers of inflammation.

Irwin MR(1), Wang M, Campomayor CO, Collado-Hidalgo A, Cole S.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Semel Institute for Neuroscience,
Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7057, USA.
mirwin1@ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: Inflammation is associated with increased risk of cardiovascular
disorders, arthritis, diabetes mellitus, and mortality. The effects of sleep loss
on the cellular and genomic mechanisms that contribute to inflammatory cytokine
activity are not known.
METHODS: In 30 healthy adults, monocyte intracellular proinflammatory cytokine
production was repeatedly assessed during the day across 3 baseline periods and
after partial sleep deprivation (awake from 11 pm to 3 am). We analyzed the
impact of sleep loss on transcription of proinflammatory cytokine genes and used 
DNA microarray analyses to characterize candidate transcription-control pathways 
that might mediate the effects of sleep loss on leukocyte gene expression.
RESULTS: In the morning after a night of sleep loss, monocyte production of
interleukin 6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha was significantly greater compared 
with morning levels following uninterrupted sleep. In addition, sleep loss
induced a more than 3-fold increase in transcription of interleukin 6 messenger
RNA and a 2-fold increase in tumor necrosis factor alpha messenger RNA.
Bioinformatics analyses suggested that the inflammatory response was mediated by 
the nuclear factor kappaB inflammatory signaling system as well as through
classic hormone and growth factor response pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleep loss induces a functional alteration of the monocyte
proinflammatory cytokine response. A modest amount of sleep loss also alters
molecular processes that drive cellular immune activation and induce inflammatory
cytokines; mapping the dynamics of sleep loss on molecular signaling pathways has
implications for understanding the role of sleep in altering immune cell
physiologic characteristics. Interventions that target sleep might constitute new
strategies to constrain inflammation with effects on inflammatory disease risk.

PMID: 16983055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Arch Intern Med. 2006 Sep 18;166(16):1725-31.

Soluble interleukin 6 receptor: A novel marker of moderate to severe
sleep-related breathing disorder.

Mehra R(1), Storfer-Isser A, Kirchner HL, Johnson N, Jenny N, Tracy RP, Redline
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Case School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA. mehrar@ameritech.net

BACKGROUND: Given the previously described association between sleep-related
breathing disorder (SRBD) and markers of inflammation, we assessed the
relationship of SRBD with levels of both interleukin 6 (IL-6) and soluble IL-6
receptor (sIL-6R), a marker with more expansive physiologic effects than IL-6.
The objectives were to explore the relationship between moderate to severe sleep 
apnea with IL-6 and sIL-6R levels and to examine morning and evening variability 
for each cytokine.
METHODS: A total of 385 adult participants (> or =18 years of age) in the
Cleveland Family Study, Cleveland, Ohio, underwent sleep studies and
determination of IL-6 and sIL-6R levels in samples obtained in the evening and
morning of polysomnography. Moderate to severe SRBD was defined as a respiratory 
disturbance index greater than or equal to 30.
RESULTS: The subjects were aged 44.9 +/- 16.7 (mean +/- SD) years, 44% were male,
and 48% were African American, with a body mass index (weight in kilograms
divided by the height in meters squared) of 32.5 +/- 8.1 (mean +/- SD). Linear
regression analysis showed that after adjustment for subject characteristics,
waist circumference, and comorbidities, SRBD was not significantly associated
with morning IL-6 levels. In contrast, linear regression analyses showed that,
compared with the participants without SRBD, those with SRBD had significantly
higher morning sIL-6R levels (mean +/- SD, 4.60 +/- 1.42 ng/mL [P = .001]), even 
after adjustment for subject characteristics, waist circumference, and
comorbidities, which persisted after adjustment of evening sIL-6R levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Morning sIL-6R levels demonstrated stronger associations with
moderate to severe SRBD than morning IL-6 levels. Associations with SRBD and
morning sIL-6R levels persisted even after adjustment for waist circumference,
cardiovascular disease, and evening sIL-6R levels, suggesting the potential
utility of sIL-6R as a marker for measuring overnight SRBD stresses. Further
investigation of this biomarker may provide insight into SRBD-related
inflammation.

PMID: 16983050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Metabolism. 2006 Oct;55(10 Suppl 2):S30-5.

Sleep and energy balance: Interactive homeostatic systems.

Vanitallie TB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center, New York, NY 10025, USA.
drvanitallie@cshore.com

For early humans, acquisition of food by hunting and/or gathering was a
hunger-driven process requiring vigilance and (often) strenuous physical effort
during daylight hours. To sustain such activities, hunter-gatherers also needed
periodic rest and sleep-pursuits most effectively undertaken at night. In recent 
years, research has given us new insights into the physiologic underpinnings of
these behaviors. Specifically, evidence has been uncovered indicating that the
homeostatic regulation of food intake on the one hand and that of sleep on the
other hand, are intertwined. Thus, carefully performed studies of eating behavior
in rats indicate that duration of sleep after ingestion of a meal is closely
correlated to the meal's energy content. In 1999, it was discovered that mice and
dogs functionally deficient in the appetite-stimulating hormone, hypocretin-1,
become narcoleptic, suggesting the existence of a "hard-wired" connection between
regulation of hunger and satiety and regulation of sleep. Administered into the
nucleus accumbens shell, hypocretin-1 induces feeding and locomotor activity in
Sprague-Dawley rats. Hypocretin neurons in the hypothalamus are responsive to
metabolic cues capable of signaling nutritional status. The suprachiasmatic
nucleus, the body's principal circadian clock, exchanges information with the
hypocretin system about the light/dark cycle and the body's metabolic condition. 
Circadian Clock mutant mice exhibit an attenuated diurnal feeding rhythm and
become hyperphagic and obese. Both disruption of the circadian cycle and sleep
deprivation can affect energy balance and, over time, may bring about substantial
changes in body composition. Although there is growing evidence that
interleukin-6 and several other proinflammatory cytokines are "sleep factors"
that also affect energy balance, any possible role they might have in
coordinating sleep/wakefulness with food-motivated behavior awaits clarification.
Yet, the evidence is increasingly strong that the neurophysiologic and metabolic 
mechanisms responsible for the control of food-seeking behavior and the control
of sleep and wakefulness are coordinated so that hunger and vigilance are paired 
during the daylight hours, and satiety and sleep are paired during darkness. The 
hypothalamic neuronal system that links these mechanisms is predominantly, but
not exclusively, hypocretinergic, and is responsive to the suprachiasmatic
nucleus circadian pacemaker and to certain metabolic signals of depletion and
repletion.

PMID: 16979424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. JAMA. 2006 Sep 6;296(9):1049-50.

Association of extended work shifts, vascular function, and inflammatory markers 
in internal medicine residents: a randomized crossover trial.

Zheng H, Patel M, Hryniewicz K, Katz SD.

PMID: 16954481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;292(1):E253-61. Epub 2006 Aug 29.

Daytime napping after a night of sleep loss decreases sleepiness, improves
performance, and causes beneficial changes in cortisol and interleukin-6
secretion.

Vgontzas AN(1), Pejovic S, Zoumakis E, Lin HM, Bixler EO, Basta M, Fang J,
Sarrigiannidis A, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Penn State Univ. College of Medicine, Dept. of Psychiatry H073, 500 University
Dr., Hershey, PA 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Sleep loss has been associated with increased sleepiness, decreased performance, 
elevations in inflammatory cytokines, and insulin resistance. Daytime napping has
been promoted as a countermeasure to sleep loss. To assess the effects of a 2-h
midafternoon nap following a night of sleep loss on postnap sleepiness,
performance, cortisol, and IL-6, 41 young healthy individuals (20 men, 21 women) 
participated in a 7-day sleep deprivation experiment (4 consecutive nights
followed by a night of sleep loss and 2 recovery nights). One-half of the
subjects were randomly assigned to take a midafternoon nap (1400-1600) the day
following the night of total sleep loss. Serial 24-h blood sampling, multiple
sleep latency test (MSLT), subjective levels of sleepiness, and psychomotor
vigilance task (PVT) were completed on the fourth (predeprivation) and sixth days
(postdeprivation). During the nap, subjects had a significant drop in cortisol
and IL-6 levels (P < 0.05). After the nap they experienced significantly less
sleepiness (MSLT and subjective, P < 0.05) and a smaller improvement on the PVT
(P < 0.1). At that time, they had a significant transient increase in their
cortisol levels (P < 0.05). In contrast, the levels of IL-6 tended to remain
decreased for approximately 8 h (P = 0.1). We conclude that a 2-h midafternoon
nap improves alertness, and to a lesser degree performance, and reverses the
effects of one night of sleep loss on cortisol and IL-6. The redistribution of
cortisol secretion and the prolonged suppression of IL-6 secretion are
beneficial, as they improve alertness and performance.

PMID: 16940468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. FASEB J. 2006 Oct;20(12):2174-6. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Sleep enhances IL-6 trans-signaling in humans.

Dimitrov S(1), Lange T, Benedict C, Nowell MA, Jones SA, Scheller J, Rose-John S,
Born J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroendocrinology, University of Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
Haus 23a, Lübeck 23538, Germany.

Sleep is commonly considered to support immune defense. The underlying
sleep-immune interaction appears to rely critically on cytokines, like
interleukin-6 (IL-6), that combine effects on immune and neuronal functions. The 
IL-6 signal is conveyed in two ways: it stimulates a restricted group of (mostly 
immune) cells via membrane-bound IL-6 receptors (mIL-6R) by forming a complex
with soluble IL-6R (sIL-6R), and it stimulates (via membrane-bound gp130) a great
variety of other cell types--a process termed trans-signaling. Focusing on the
receptor side of IL-6 signaling, we examined the effect of sleep on sIL-6R plasma
concentrations, mIL-6R expression, plasma sgp130, and numbers of IL-6-producing
monocytes in healthy humans who were tested during a regular sleep-wake cycle and
24 h of wakefulness while blood was sampled repeatedly. Sleep strongly enhanced
concentrations of sIL-6R, exceeding wake levels by 70% at the end of sleep. This 
rise was due to an increase in the PC (proteolytic cleavage) rather than the DS
(differentially spliced) variant of sIL-6R. Sleep did not affect IL-6-producing
monocytes, mIL-6R density, or sgp130 concentrations. The selective increase in
sIL-6R implicates an enhanced trans-signaling capacity whereby sleep distinctly
widens the profile of IL-6 actions, enabling an integrated influence on brain and
peripheral organs.

PMID: 16912152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Metabolism. 2006 Aug;55(8):1076-82.

Plasma interleukin 6 levels are elevated in polycystic ovary syndrome
independently of obesity or sleep apnea.

Vgontzas AN(1), Trakada G, Bixler EO, Lin HM, Pejovic S, Zoumakis E, Chrousos GP,
Legro RS.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry H073, Penn State
University College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Premenopausal women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) are at a much higher
risk for excessive daytime sleepiness, fatigue, and insulin resistance than
control women. Elevated levels of interleukin 6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-alpha) are presumably part of the pathogenesis of these clinical
manifestations. Forty-two obese women with PCOS, 17 body mass index-comparable
obese controls, and 15 normal-weight controls free from apnea participated in the
study that included one 8-hour nighttime polysomnography, single morning cytokine
plasma concentrations, and insulin resistance indices. Women with PCOS exhibited 
higher plasma concentrations of IL-6 than obese controls, who had intermediate
values, or normal-weight controls, who had the lowest values (4.75 +/- 0.5 vs
3.65 +/- 0.4 vs 1.84 +/- 0.3 pg/mL, P < .01). Tumor necrosis factor alpha values 
were higher in PCOS and obese controls compared with normal-weight controls, but 
the difference was not statistically significant (4.05 +/- 0.3 vs 3.79 +/- 0.2 vs
3.14 +/- 0.2 pg/mL, P = .103). Based on backward regression analysis, IL-6 levels
had a stronger association with the PCOS group than with the obese group, and the
sleep or hypoxia variables did not make a significant contribution to either IL-6
or TNF-alpha. Both IL-6 and TNF-alpha correlated positively with body mass index 
(P < .01) in obese controls but not in women with PCOS. Furthermore, within the
PCOS group, IL-6 and TNF-alpha correlated more strongly with indices of insulin
resistance than obesity. We conclude that IL-6 levels are elevated in obese women
with PCOS independently of obesity or sleep apnea and may represent a
pathophysiologic link to insulin resistance.

PMID: 16839844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Metabolism. 2006 Aug;55(8):1014-21.

High serum high-sensitivity C-reactive protein concentrations are associated with
relative cardiac sympathetic overactivity during the early morning period in type
2 diabetic patients with metabolic syndrome.

Aso Y(1), Wakabayashi S, Nakano T, Yamamoto R, Takebayashi K, Inukai T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Koshigaya Hospital, Dokkyo Medical
University, Koshigaya, Saitama 343-8555, Japan. yaso@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Sympathetic activation is associated with metabolic syndrome (MS) and increased
risk of cardiovascular disease. The aim of this study was to investigate whether 
cardiac autonomic activity or sympathovagal balance, as estimated by a 24-hour
power spectral analysis of heart rate variation, is associated with serum
concentrations of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), a sensitive
predictor for cardiovascular events, in type 2 diabetic patients with and without
MS. We studied 104 type 2 diabetic patients (50 female and 54 male). The
diagnosis of MS was based on the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult
Treatment Panel III criteria. Based on the serum hs-CRP, diabetic patients were
also divided into 3 groups: low risk (CRP < 1.0 mg/L), moderate risk (1.0 < or = 
CRP < or = 3.0), and high risk (CRP > 3.0). Heart rate variation was determined
automatically every 5 minutes over 24 hours using an ambulatory Holter
electrocardiographic recording. Power spectral analysis of the R-R intervals was 
performed by fast Fourier transformation. Low frequency (LF, both sympathetic and
parasympathetic activities), high frequency (HF, pure parasympathetic activity), 
and the ratio of LF to HF, an index of sympathovagal balance, were used as
indices of cardiac autonomic activity. Blood concentrations of hs-CRP,
interleukin 6, and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 were higher in diabetic
patients with than in those without MS (P < .0001, P = .0056, and P < .0001,
respectively). Both the 24-hour mean LF and the LF-to-HF ratio were also
significantly higher in diabetic patients with than in those without MS (P =
.0397 and P = .0483, respectively). The LF-to-HF ratio at 6:00 am was
significantly higher in diabetic patients with a high CRP concentration than in
those with a low or moderate CRP concentration (P < .001 and P < .01,
respectively). Only urinary albumin and hs-CRP were independent factors
predicting the LF-to-HF ratio at 6:00 am in diabetic patients. In conclusion,
type 2 diabetic patients with MS have elevated markers of inflammation and
evidence of cardiac sympathetic predominance. High serum concentrations of hs-CRP
are associated with relative cardiac sympathetic overactivity during the early
morning in type 2 diabetic patients.

PMID: 16839835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Oncol Nurs Forum. 2006 May 3;33(3):535-42.

Cancer chemotherapy-related symptoms: evidence to suggest a role for
proinflammatory cytokines.

Wood LJ(1), Nail LM, Gilster A, Winters KA, Elsea CR.

Author information: 
(1)School of Nursing, Oregon Health and Science University (OHSU) Cancer,
Portland, OR, USA. woodl@ohsu.edu

PURPOSE/OBJECTIVES: To provide an overview of the evidence that supports a role
for the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in the etiology of cancer
chemotherapy-related symptoms.
DATA SOURCES: Electronic nursing, psychology, and medicine databases; online
meeting abstracts; and personal experimental observations.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Substantial evidence implicates the proinflammatory cytokines
IL-1beta, TNF-alpha, and IL-6 in the etiology of chemotherapy-related anorexia,
cachexia, anemia, pain, sleep disturbance, fatigue, and depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Further investigation into the role of these cytokines in the
genesis of chemotherapy-related symptoms is warranted. The development of
appropriate animal models likely will be key to understanding the relationship
among cancer chemotherapy, proinflammatory cytokines, and symptoms.
IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING: Nurses traditionally have been leaders in symptom
management. The symptoms experienced by patients undergoing chemotherapy have a
profound negative impact on quality of life and patients' ability to receive
prescribed treatments. An understanding of potential mechanisms underlying the
physiologic and behavioral consequences of chemotherapy administration will aid
nurses in the development of interventions to effectively manage
chemotherapy-related symptoms.

PMID: 16676010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2006 Mar;54(3):431-7.

Poor sleep is associated with higher plasma proinflammatory cytokine
interleukin-6 and procoagulant marker fibrin D-dimer in older caregivers of
people with Alzheimer's disease.

von Känel R(1), Dimsdale JE, Ancoli-Israel S, Mills PJ, Patterson TL, McKibbin
CL, Archuleta C, Grant I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Berne,
Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether objective measures of sleep correlate with
plasma levels of the proinflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-6 and the
procoagulant marker fibrin D-dimer in caregivers of patients with dementia.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Subjects' homes.
PARTICIPANTS: Sixty-four community-dwelling spousal caregivers (69% women, mean
age+/-standard deviation 72+/-9) and 36 sex-matched noncaregiving controls.
MEASUREMENTS: All participants underwent in-home full-night polysomnography.
Demographic and lifestyle factors, depression, diseases, and medication that
could affect inflammation, coagulation, and sleep were controlled for in analyses
regressing sleep variables and caregiver status and their interaction on plasma
levels of IL-6 and D-dimer.
RESULTS: Caregivers had higher levels of D-dimer (781+/-591 vs 463+/-214 ng/mL,
P=.001) and IL-6 (1.42+/-1.52 vs 0.99+/-0.86 pg/mL, P<.06) and lower levels of
total sleep time (369+/-70 vs 393+/-51 minutes, P=.049) and sleep efficiency
(77+/-11 vs 82+/-9%, P=.04) than controls. After controlling for age and body
mass index, longer wake time after sleep onset (change in coefficient of
determination (DeltaR2)=0.039, P=.04) and the interaction between caregiver
status and higher apnea-hypopnea index (DeltaR2=0.054, P=.01) were predictors of 
IL-6. Controlling for age, caregiver status independently predicted D-dimer
levels (DeltaR2=0.047, P=.01). Controlling for age and caregiver status, lower
sleep efficiency (DeltaR2=0.032, P=.03) and the interaction between caregiver
status and more Stage 2 sleep (DeltaR2=0.037, P=.02) independently predicted
plasma D-dimer levels.
CONCLUSION: Poor sleep was associated with higher plasma IL-6 and D-dimer levels.
These effects were most pronounced in caregivers of subjects with Alzheimer's
disease. The findings suggest a mechanism that may explain how disturbed sleep
might be associated downstream with cardiovascular risk, particularly in older
people under chronic stress.

PMID: 16551309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Med Invest. 2006 Feb;53(1-2):134-9.

Relationship between adhesion molecules with hs-CRP and changes therein after ARB
(Valsartan) administration in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.

Kageyama N(1), Nomura M, Nakaya Y, Watanabe T, Ito S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive and Cardiovascular Medicine, Institute of Health
Biosciences, The University of Tokushima Graduate School, Japan.

It has been reported that a relationship exists between obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome (OSAS) and cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases. To address this 
issue, we evaluated whether OSAS is associated with adhesion molecules and
inflammatory signs, important indicators of atherosclerosis. Levels of
high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) and intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) were
measured in 30 patients with ischemic heart disease, confirmed by coronary
arteriography (IHD group). Twenty healthy volunteers without sleep apnea were
used as controls (Group N). Sleeping respiratory information was collected using 
a portable sleep polygraph, together on information about oronasal flow, tracheal
sound, chest respiration, and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) to obtain the
apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). In the IHD group, 9 (30%) of the 30 patients showed
evidence of OSAS [IHD(AHI> or = 40) group] and 21 did not [IHD(AHI<40) group].
The levels of hs-CRP and ICAM-1 were significantly higher in the IHD group than
in the N group (p<0.01). Moreover, the levels of hs-CRP and ICAM-1 were
significantly higher in the IHD(AHI > or = 40) group than in the IHD(AHI<40)
group (p<0.01). However, after the administration of valsartan, angiotensin II
receptor antagonists (ARB) to both IHD groups, the levels of hs-CRP and ICAM-1
decreased significantly in both groups. Moreover, a multivariate analysis
revealed that the levels of hs-CRP and ICAM-1 were associated with the severity
of sleep apnea. These findings suggest that, in OSAS the levels of hs-CRP and
ICAM-1 are decreased and that the administration of ARB decreases the risk of
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 16538006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Anesthesiology. 2006 Mar;104(3):403-10.

Upregulation of prostaglandin E2 and interleukins in the central nervous system
and peripheral tissue during and after surgery in humans.

Buvanendran A(1), Kroin JS, Berger RA, Hallab NJ, Saha C, Negrescu C, Moric M,
Caicedo MS, Tuman KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA. asokumar@aol.com

Erratum in
    Anesthesiology. 2006 Apr;104(4):900.

Comment in
    Anesthesiology. 2007 Aug;107(2):358-9.

BACKGROUND: The central and peripheral inflammatory response to surgery may
influence patient outcomes. This study examines the time course and clinical
relevance of changes in prostaglandin E2 and cytokines in cerebrospinal fluid,
local tissue (surgical site), and circulating blood during and after total hip
replacement.
METHODS: Thirty osteoarthritis patients undergoing primary total hip arthroplasty
with spinal anesthesia were randomly allocated to three groups (n = 10/group):
placebo for 4 days before surgery and on the morning of surgery; placebo for 4
days before surgery and oral rofecoxib 50 mg on the morning of surgery; oral
rofecoxib 50 mg for 4 days before surgery and the morning of surgery.
Cerebrospinal fluid and plasma were collected before surgery and up to 30 h after
incision for measurement of prostaglandin E2 and interleukins. When hip
replacement was complete, a drain was placed in the hip wound and exudates were
collected at 3 to 30 h after incision.
RESULTS: Cerebrospinal fluid showed an initial increase in interleukin 6 and a
later rise in prostaglandin E2 concentration after surgery; interleukin 1beta and
tumor necrosis factor alpha were undetectable. Hip surgical site fluid evidenced 
an increase in prostaglandin E2, interleukin 6, interleukin 8, and interleukin
1beta; tumor necrosis factor alpha decreased at 24 and 30 h. Preoperative
administration of the cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitor rofecoxib reduced cerebrospinal 
fluid and surgical site prostaglandin E2 and cerebrospinal fluid interleukin 6.
Cerebrospinal fluid prostaglandin E2 was positively correlated with postoperative
pain and cerebrospinal fluid interleukin 6 with sleep disturbance. Poorer
functional recovery was positively correlated with increased surgical site
prostaglandin E2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that upregulation of prostaglandin E2 and
interleukin 6 at central sites is an important component of surgery induced
inflammatory response in patients and may influence clinical outcome.

PMID: 16508385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2006 May;97(2):151-7. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

Seven days' around the clock exhaustive physical exertion combined with energy
depletion and sleep deprivation primes circulating leukocytes.

Gundersen Y(1), Opstad PK, Reistad T, Thrane I, Vaagenes P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protection, Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, Forsvarets
forskningsinstitutt/Avdeling B, N-2027, Kjeller, Norway. yngvar.gundersen@ffi.no

Both exhaustive physical exertion and starvation have been reported to induce
depression of immune function. The aim of the present study was to investigate
the inflammatory environment and state of activation and mediator-producing
potential of circulating leukocytes during prolonged physical activity with
concomitant energy and sleep deprivation. Eight well-trained males were studied
during 7 days of semi-continuous physical activity. Sleep was restricted to about
1 h/24 h, energy intake to 1.5- 3.0 MJ/24 h. Blood was drawn at 07.00 A.M.: on
days 0, 2, 4, and 7. Plasma levels of inflammation markers were measured. The
response of circulating leukocytes to lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 1 microg mL(-1)), 
and the effect of added hydrocortisone (10 and 100 nmol L(-1)), were measured in 
the supernatant after 3 h of incubation in an ex vivo whole blood model.
Activation of leukocytes steadily increased as measured by plasma matrix
metalloproteinase-9, tumour necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1beta, and
interleukin-6. Inhibitors of systemic inflammation were either unaltered (tissue 
inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1) or elevated (plasma interleukin-1
receptor antagonist). Cortisol levels increased on days 2 and 4, but thereafter
reverted to baseline values. The leukocytes responded to LPS activation with
increasing release of inflammatory cytokines throughout the study period. The
anti-inflammatory potency of hydrocortisone decreased. Prolonged multifactorial
stress thus activated circulating immune cells and primed them for an increased
response to a subsequent microbial challenge.

PMID: 16506059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. South Med J. 2006 Jan;99(1):58-67; quiz 68-9, 81.

Inflammatory aspects of sleep apnea and their cardiovascular consequences.

Kasasbeh E(1), Chi DS, Krishnaswamy G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Quillen
College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN 37614,
USA.

Erratum in
    South Med J. 2006 Feb;99(2):163.

Summary for patients in
    South Med J. 2006 Jan;99(1):104.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common medical condition that occurs in a
considerable percentage of the population. Substantial evidence shows that
patients with OSA have an increased incidence of hypertension compared with
individuals without OSA, and that OSA is a risk factor for the development of
hypertension. It is established that OSA may be implicated in stroke and
transient ischemic attacks. OSA is associated with coronary heart disease, heart 
failure, and cardiac arrhythmias. Pulmonary hypertension may be associated with
OSA, especially in patients with pre-existing pulmonary disease. Although the
exact cause that links OSA with cardiovascular disease is unknown, there is
evidence that OSA is associated with a group of proinflammatory and prothrombotic
factors that have been identified as important in the development of
atherosclerosis. OSA is associated with increased daytime and nocturnal
sympathetic activity. Autonomic abnormalities seen in patients with OSA include
increased resting heart rate, decreased R-R interval variability, and increased
blood pressure variability. Both atherosclerosis and OSA are associated with
endothelial dysfunction, increased C-reactive protein, interleukin 6, fibrinogen,
plasminogen activator inhibitor, and reduced fibrinolytic activity. OSA has been 
associated with enhanced platelet activity and aggregation. Leukocyte adhesion
and accumulation on endothelial cells are common in both OSA and atherosclerosis.
Clinicians should be aware that OSA may be a risk factor for the development of
cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 16466124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2006 Feb;45(2):229-30. Epub 2005 Dec 13.

Sequential synovial fluid sampling suggests plasma and synovial fluid IL-6 vary
independently in rheumatoid arthritis.

Perry MG, Richards L, Harbuz MS, Jessop DS, Kirwan JR.

PMID: 16352642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Dec 20;102(51):18757-62. Epub 2005 Dec 8.

Social relationships, sleep quality, and interleukin-6 in aging women.

Friedman EM(1), Hayney MS, Love GD, Urry HL, Rosenkranz MA, Davidson RJ, Singer
BH, Ryff CD.

Author information: 
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Health & Society Scholars Program, Department of
Population Health Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53726, USA.
friedman1@wisc.edu

This study examined the interplay of social engagement, sleep quality, and plasma
levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in a sample of aging women (n = 74, aged 61-90, M 
age = 73.4). Social engagement was assessed by questionnaire, sleep was assessed 
by using the NightCap in-home sleep monitoring system and the Pittsburgh Sleep
Quality Index, and blood samples were obtained for analysis of plasma levels of
IL-6. Regarding subjective assessment, poorer sleep (higher scores on the
Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index) was associated with lower positive social
relations scores. Multivariate regression analyses showed that lower levels of
plasma IL-6 were predicted by greater sleep efficiency (P < 0.001), measured
objectively and by more positive social relations (P < 0.05). A significant
interaction showed that women with the highest IL-6 levels were those with both
poor sleep efficiency and poor social relations (P < 0.05). However, those with
low sleep efficiency but compensating good relationships as well as women with
poor relationships but compensating high sleep efficiency had IL-6 levels
comparable to those with the protective influences of both good social ties and
good sleep.

PMCID: PMC1317967
PMID: 16339311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Am J Chin Med. 2005;33(5):703-11.

Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang regulates plasma interleukin-6 and soluble
interleukin-6 receptor concentrations and improves depressed mood in climacteric 
women with insomnia.

Ushiroyama T(1), Ikeda A, Sakuma K, Ueki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka Medical College Takatsuki,
Osaka 569-8686, Japan. gyn003@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

This study was performed to compare the effects of Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang
(Saiko-keishi-kankyo-to), an herbal medicine, in improving depressed mood and on 
plasma interleukin-6 (IL-6) and soluble interleukin-6 receptor (sIL-6R)
concentrations with those of anti-depressants in peri- and post-menopausal women.
Ninety patients complaining of menopausal symptoms including insomnia who were
diagnosed with mood disorder based on DSM-IV were recruited and separated into
two groups (Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang group was selected on the basis of SHO
for 42 cases, while anti-depressants were used for 48 cases), and plasma IL-6 and
sIL-6R concentrations were determined before and after three months of the
treatment. There were no significant differences in the decrease in both
climacteric and Hamilton depression score after treatment between the two groups.
Plasma IL-6 and sIL-6R concentrations were significantly lower in the
Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang group (-34.8 +/- 15.5% and -22.4 +/- 14.6%,
respectively) than in the anti-depressant group (7.5 +/- 4.8% and 2.4 +/- 3.8%,
respectively) after 3 months of treatment. Correlations between rate of decrease 
in climacteric score and plasma IL-6 (R = 0.498, P = 0.0056) and sIL-6R (R =
0.512, P = 0.0045) concentrations were observed. Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang
reduced plasma IL-6 and sIL-6R concentrations in relation to improvement of
depressed mood during treatment. The findings of this study suggest that
Chai-hu-gui-zhi-gan-jiang-tang has the potential to decrease morbidity by
alleviation of stress reactions in peri- and post-menopausal women.

PMID: 16265982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2005 Nov;99(5):1998-2007.

Disorders of glucose metabolism in sleep apnea.

Punjabi NM(1), Polotsky VY.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
npunjabi@jhmi.edu

Sleep is a complex behavioral state that occupies one-third of the human life
span. Although viewed as a passive condition, sleep is a highly active and
dynamic process. The sleep-related decrease in muscle tone is associated with an 
increase in resistance to airflow through the upper airway. Partial or complete
collapse of the airway during sleep can lead to the occurrence of apneas and
hypopneas during sleep that define the syndrome of sleep apnea. Sleep apnea has
become pervasive in Western society, affecting approximately 5% of adults in
industrialized countries. Given the pandemic of obesity, the prevalence of Type 2
diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome has also increased dramatically over the
last decade. Although the role of sleep apnea in cardiovascular disease is
uncertain, there is a growing body of literature that implicates sleep apnea in
the pathogenesis of altered glucose metabolism. Intermittent hypoxemia and sleep 
fragmentation in sleep apnea can trigger a cascade of pathophysiological events, 
including autonomic activation, alterations in neuroendocrine function, and
release of potent proinflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha
and interleukin-6. Epidemiologic and experimental evidence linking sleep apnea
and disorders of glucose metabolism is reviewed and discussed here. Although the 
cause-and-effect relationship remains to be determined, the available data
suggest that sleep apnea is independently associated with altered glucose
metabolism and may predispose to the eventual development of Type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

PMID: 16227461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Physiol Pharmacol. 2005 Sep;56 Suppl 4:71-7.

Disturbed angiogenic activity in sera from obstructive sleep apnea patients.

Chorostowska-Wynimko J(1), Radomska D, Pływaczewski R, Jończak L, Stepniewska A, 
Górecka D, Skopińska-Rózewska E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Diagnostics, National Institute of Tuberculosis and
Lung Diseases, Warsaw, Poland. j.chorostowska@igichp.edu.pl

It is increasingly recognized that obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) syndrome is a
systematic rather than local disorder. There is also growing evidence that apart 
from the syndrome's major features: intermittent hypoxia and sleep fragmentation,
functional activity of the immune system is altered in OSA patients, with several
cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6
(IL-6) taking active part in sleep regulation. Little is known about the effects 
exerted by chronic intermittent hypoxia combined with persistent pro-inflammatory
activity of the immune system on the vascular micro milieu in OSA. In this study 
we attempted to confirm the hypothesized imbalance between pro- and
anti-angiogenic factors by evaluating direct and indirect angiogenic activity of 
OSA patients' sera in the in vivo serum-induced angiogenesis (SIA) and
leukocyte-induced (LIA) assays, respectively, in mice. Both tests revealed
significantly inhibited angiogenic activity of OSA patients' sera compared with
healthy controls (P<0.001). Moreover, differences related to the subject's weight
regarding in the mean number of newly-formed vessels were observed with a
significantly greater inhibition in the normal-weighing apneic subjects than in
the overweight or obese ones (P<0.01). The angiogenesis inhibition index was
positively related to the serum IL-6 level (r=0.35; P<0.05) in the OSA group, but
not to TNF-alpha, fasting serum leptin, or OSA syndrome severity as assessed by
the AHI index. Our results demonstrate that OSA is accompanied by disturbed serum
angiogenic activity, apparently resulting from an imbalance between pro- and
anti-angiogenic factors, some of them being produced by the adipose tissue. The
disordered angiogenic activity might be related to the pathophysiology of OSA and
should be considered an important causative factor for the increased prevalence
of cardiovascular diseases in OSA patients.

PMID: 16204778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Clin Calcium. 2005 Sep;15(9):1544-7.

[Osteoporosis and stress].

[Article in Japanese]

Kumano H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychosomatic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo.

There may be three ways of relationship between stress and osteoporosis. The
first is that stress induces some physiological changes leading to osteoporosis. 
The second is that stress induces behavioral distortion of eating, drinking,
exercise, and sleep habits, which leads to osteoporosis. The third is that
osteoporosis, on the other hand, brings about anxiety, depression, loss of social
roles, and social isolation, which leads to stress. The susceptible sex and age
groups are postmenopausal women and young women. The abrupt decrease of estrogen 
in postmenopausal women promotes reabsorption of bone, and it was also reported
that the increase of interleukin-6 (IL-6) that is downstream of estrogen was
related to the production of osteoclast and to the development of disability of
the aged. Regarding the association with stress, while it was reported that
depression or depressive states directly increased inflammation-induced cytokines
including IL-6, it was also pointed out that stress-induced easy infectious may
produce chronic infection, which indirectly increases inflammation-induced
cytokines. Anorexia Nervosa that is assumed to be associated with adolescent
developmental stress is noteworthy in young women. Amenorrhea is always present
in this disease, and in addition to bone reabsorption associated with estrogen
deficiency, the decrease of bone formation associated with malnutrition may be
related to the development of osteoporosis.

PMID: 16137956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Sep 1;172(5):625-30.

Increased carotid intima-media thickness and serum inflammatory markers in
obstructive sleep apnea.

Minoguchi K(1), Yokoe T, Tazaki T, Minoguchi H, Tanaka A, Oda N, Okada S, Ohta S,
Naito H, Adachi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University, School of Medicine,
1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8666, Japan. minochan@fn.catv.ne.jp

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2005 Sep 1;172(5):518-9.

Increased carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) and increased serum levels of
inflammatory markers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin (IL)-6, and
IL-18, are associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular and
cerebrovascular diseases. The aim of this study was to evaluate whether carotid
IMT, a useful marker for early atherosclerosis, is associated with these
inflammatory markers in patients with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). Carotid IMT 
was investigated with ultrasonography in 36 patients with OSA and 16 obese
control subjects. Serum levels of CRP, IL-6, and IL-18 were measured at 5:00 A.M.
Carotid IMT (p < 0.001) and serum levels of CRP (p < 0.003), IL-6 (p < 0.005),
and IL-18 (p < 0.03) of patients with OSA were significantly higher than those of
obese control subjects. Carotid IMT was significantly correlated with serum
levels of CRP (r = 0.61, p = 0.0001), IL-6 (r = 0.41, p = 0.01), and IL-18 (r =
0.45, p = 0.005), duration of OSA-related hypoxia (r = 0.60, p = 0.0001), and
severity of OSA (r = 0.50, p = 0.002). In addition, the primary factor
influencing carotid IMT was duration of hypoxia during total sleep time (p =
0.036). These results suggest that OSA-related hypoxia and systemic inflammation 
might be associated with the progression of atherosclerosis and thus might
increase the risks of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular morbidity in patients
with OSA.

PMID: 16120716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Nephrology (Carlton). 2005 Aug;10(4):330-5.

Relationship between sleep complaints and proinflammatory cytokines in
haemodialysis patients.

Erten Y(1), Kokturk O, Yuksel A, Elbeg S, Ciftci TU, Pasaoglu H, Ozkan S, Bali M,
Arinsoi T, Sindel S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey. yaserten@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Sleep complaints are common in end-stage renal disease. We aimed to
investigate the relationship between sleep-related complaints and inflammatory
cytokines in haemodialysis (HD) patients, and also the effects of HD on sleep
patterns and cytokine levels.
METHODS: Predialysis serum interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and
tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) levels in nine patients with sleep
complaints were compared with those of nine patients without sleep complaints and
nine healthy controls. Patients with sleep complaints underwent polysomnography
the night after HD and the following night.
RESULTS: Patients with sleep complaints had significantly higher predialysis
IL-1beta levels compared with those without and healthy controls (P=0.004 and
P=0.000, respectively). They also had higher predialysis IL-6 and TNF-alpha
levels than those without sleep complaints; however, the difference was not
significant. Patients without sleep complaints had higher mean IL-6 and TNF-alpha
and similar mean IL-1beta levels compared with healthy controls (P=0.001,
P=0.024, P=0.26, respectively). Obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) was
found in six out of nine (66%) patients with sleep complaints. Sleep architecture
and cytokine levels did not differ between the two nights. The mean serum
IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels did not differ in the pre- and
post-polysomnographic samples. There was no correlation between IL-1beta, IL-6 or
TNF-alpha levels and the apnoea-hypopnoea index.
CONCLUSIONS: Proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1beta in particular, might be
associated with sleep complaints in HD patients. OSAS is not uncommon in HD
patients with sleep-related complaints and sleep architecture does not appear to 
be effected by the HD procedure itself.

PMID: 16109076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Brain Behav Immun. 2006 May;20(3):246-53. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Increased nocturnal interleukin-6 excretion in patients with primary insomnia: a 
pilot study.

Burgos I(1), Richter L, Klein T, Fiebich B, Feige B, Lieb K, Voderholzer U,
Riemann D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Hospital of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany.

The aim of the present study was to investigate whether there is a difference in 
evening/nocturnal interleukin-6 (IL-6) serum excretion in patients with primary
insomnia compared to controls. We hypothesized that in insomniac patients, the
excretion of evening/nocturnal IL-6 is enhanced, like observed in aged adults and
after sleep deprivation in healthy subjects. We studied IL-6 serum concentrations
in 11 patients (two males and nine females) with primary insomnia and 11 age and 
gender-matched healthy controls. Sleep was monitored polysomnographically for
three consecutive nights. The measurement of IL-6 (from 19:00 h to 09:00 h) in
2-h intervals were performed prior to and during the last laboratory night.
Polysomnographically determined sleep parameters and subjective ratings of sleep 
demonstrated clear-cut impairments of sleep in the insomniac group. Nocturnal
IL-6 secretion was significantly increased (p<.05) in insomniac patients for the 
whole measurement period (mean area under the curve+/-SD: 27.94+/-14.15 pg/ml x
2h) compared to controls (16.70+/-7.64 pg/ml x 2h). Total IL-6 secretion
correlated inversely with subjectively perceived sleep quality and amount of slow
wave sleep in the insomniac patients. Amount of Wake Time correlated positively
with IL-6 excretion in insomniacs. The results of the present study demonstrate
significantly increased nocturnal IL-6 secretion in insomniacs. It might be
speculated that chronic primary insomnia with polysomnographically documented
sleep impairments activates the production of IL-6 analogous to sleep deprivation
studies in healthy subjects. This might also implicate a higher risk for
inflammatory and cardiovascular diseases in patients with chronic insomnia.

PMID: 16084689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Zhonghua Jie He He Hu Xi Za Zhi. 2005 Jun;28(6):364-7.

[The interleukin-6 level in exhaled breath condensate of patients with
obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Qiao H(1), Wang GF, Zhang H, Ding CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 
100034, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore whether the airway inflammation marker in exhaled breath
condensate is increased in obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS).
METHODS: Thirty-one patients with OSAHS (15 smokers and 16 non-smokers) and 10
healthy age-matched and weight-matched controls were included in the study.
Exhaled breath condensate (EBC) was collected before and after sleep at the same 
night from both groups. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) in EBC was measured by a specific
enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: (1) There was no difference in the pre-sleep IL-6 level among OSAHS
smoker group, OSAHS non-smoker group and the control subjects (F = 0.515, P >
0.05). Compared with the level of pre-sleep [(2.5 +/- 1.0) ng/L in OSAHS smoker, 
and (2.3 +/- 0.8) ng/L in OSAHS non-smoker], the post-sleep level of IL-6 was
elevated significantly in EBC from OSAHS patients of non-smokers [(3.1 +/- 1.2)
ng/L] and smokers [(3.7 +/- 1.9) ng/L, P < 0.05]. Nevertheless, IL-6 level from
the control group showed a reverse change. IL-6 was decreased significantly [(2.0
+/- 0.8) ng/L in pre-sleep vs (2.7 +/- 1.0) ng/L in post-sleep] after sleep in
this group. There was no difference in post-sleep IL-6 level between OSAHS
smokers [(3.7 +/- 1.9) ng/L] and non-smokers [(3.1 +/- 1.2) ng/L, P > 0.05]. A
significant higher IL-6 level was observed in both OSAHS smokers [(3.7 +/- 1.9)
ng/L] and non-smokers [(3.1 +/- 1.2) ng/L] compared with the controlled group
[(2.0 +/- 0.8) ng/L, P < 0.05]. IL-6 level in EBC was correlated positively with 
AHI (r = 0.441, P < 0.05), ODI(4) (r = 0.533, P < 0.05), and negatively with
minimal oxygen saturation (r = -0.529, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that inflammation was characteristic in the
airways of OSAHS patients. Nocturnal hypoxia could be responsible for this
change. The levels of IL-6 in EBC are associated with the severity of OSAHS and
may prove to be useful in monitoring of airway inflammation in OSAHS.

PMID: 16008970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Chest. 2005 Jun;127(6):2294.

Oxidative stress and cardiovascular complications in sleep apnea.

Carpagnano GE, Foschino-Barbaro MP, Resta O, Barnes PJ.

Comment on
    Chest. 2004 May;125(5):1964-5; author reply 1965.

PMID: 15947364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2005;12(3):164-72.

Effects of combined stress during intense training on cellular immunity, hormones
and respiratory infections.

Gomez-Merino D(1), Drogou C, Chennaoui M, Tiollier E, Mathieu J, Guezennec CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, IMASSA, Brétigny-sur-Orge, France. dgomez@imassa.fr

OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to determine immune and hormonal changes and 
their relationship with the incidence of upper respiratory tract infections
(URTIs) during an extremely stressful military training (3 weeks of physical
conditioning followed by a 5-day combat course with energy restriction, sleep
deprivation and psychological stress).
METHODS: Blood samples were collected from 21 cadets (21 +/- 2 years old) before 
training and after the combat course for analysis of leukocyte and lymphocyte
subpopulations, serum cytokines [interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-1beta and IL-10], and
hormones [catecholamines, cortisol, leptin, total insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I), prolactin, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) and testosterone].
Symptoms of URTI were recorded from health logs and medical examinations during
training.
RESULTS: After the combat course, total leukocyte and neutrophil counts were
significantly increased while total lymphocytes were unchanged. In lymphocyte
subsets, NK cells were reduced (p < 0.01), while CD4+ and CD19+ (B) cells were
increased. Levels of IL-6 were increased (p < 0.01), while those of IL-1beta and 
IL-10 were unchanged. Norepinephrine and dopamine levels were increased, while
those of cortisol were reduced. Levels of leptin, testosterone, prolactin and
total IGF-I were reduced, while those of DHEAS were increased. The incidence of
URTI increased during the training (chi(2) = 53.48, p < 0.05). After training
data analysis showed a significant correlation between URTIs and NK cells (p =
0.0023). Training-induced changes in immune and hormonal parameters were
correlated.
CONCLUSIONS: Blood NK cell levels are related to increased respiratory infections
during physical training in a multistressor environment. The training-induced
decreases in immunostimulatory hormone levels may have triggered
immunosuppression.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15905625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2005;12(3):131-40.

IL-6 and its circadian secretion in humans.

Vgontzas AN(1), Bixler EO, Lin HM, Prolo P, Trakada G, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, Penn State
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a pleiotropic cytokine produced by numerous types of
immune and nonimmune cells and is involved in many pathophysiologic mechanisms in
humans. Many studies suggest that IL-6 is a putative 'sleep factor' and its
circadian secretion correlates with sleep/sleepiness. IL-6 is elevated in
disorders of excessive daytime sleepiness such as narcolepsy and obstructive
sleep apnea. It correlates positively with body mass index and may be a mediator 
of sleepiness in obesity. Also the secretion of this cytokine is stimulated by
total acute or partial short-term sleep loss reflecting the increased sleepiness 
experienced by sleep-deprived individuals. Studies that evaluated the 24-hour
secretory pattern of IL-6 in healthy young adults suggest that IL-6 is secreted
in a biphasic circadian pattern with two nadirs at about 08.00 and 21.00, and two
zeniths at about 19.00 and 05.00 h. In contrast, following sleep deprivation or
in disorders of sleep disturbance, e.g., insomnia, IL-6 peaks during the day and,
based on the level of stress system activity, i.e., cortisol secretion,
contributes to either sleepiness and deep sleep (low cortisol) or feelings of
tiredness and fatigue and poor sleep (high cortisol). In order to address
concerns about the potential impact of differences of IL-6 levels between the
beginning and the end of the 24-hour blood-drawing experiment, we proceeded with 
a cosinor analysis of 'detrended' data in young and old healthy individuals. This
new analysis did not affect the biphasic circadian pattern of IL-6 secretion in
young adults, while it augmented the flattened circadian pattern in old
individuals in whom the difference was greater. Finally, IL-6 appears to be
somnogenic in rats and exhibits a diurnal rhythm that follows the sleep/wake
cycle in these animals. We conclude that IL-6 is a mediator of sleepiness and its
circadian pattern reflects the homeostatic drive for sleep.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15905620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Sleep Med Rev. 2005 Jun;9(3):211-24.

Sleep apnea is a manifestation of the metabolic syndrome.

Vgontzas AN(1), Bixler EO, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry H073, Penn State College of Medicine, 500 University 
Drive, Hershey, PA 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a prevalent disorder particularly among
middle-aged, obese men, although its existence in women as well as in lean
individuals is increasingly recognized. Despite the early recognition of the
strong association between OSA and obesity, and OSA and cardiovascular problems, 
sleep apnea has been treated as a 'local abnormality' of the respiratory track
rather than as a 'systemic illness.' In 1997, we first reported that the
pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNFalpha) were elevated in patients with disorders of excessive daytime
sleepiness (EDS) and proposed that these cytokines were mediators of daytime
sleepiness. Also, we reported a positive correlation between IL-6 or TNFalpha
plasma levels and the body-mass-index (BMI). In subsequent studies, we showed
that IL-6, TNFalpha, and insulin levels were elevated in sleep apnea
independently of obesity and that visceral fat, was the primary parameter linked 
with sleep apnea. Furthermore, our findings that women with the polycystic ovary 
syndrome (PCOS) (a condition associated with hyperandrogenism and insulin
resistance) were much more likely than controls to have sleep disordered
breathing (SDB) and daytime sleepiness, suggests a pathogenetic role of insulin
resistance in OSA. Other findings that support the view that sleep apnea and
sleepiness in obese patients may be manifestations of the Metabolic Syndrome,
include: obesity without sleep apnea is associated with daytime sleepiness; PCOS 
and diabetes type 2 are independently associated with EDS after controlling for
SDB, obesity, and age; increased prevalence of sleep apnea in post-menopausal
women, with hormonal replacement therapy associated with a significantly reduced 
risk for OSA; lack of effect of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) in
obese patients with apnea on hypercytokinemia and insulin resistance indices; and
that the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in the US population from the Third
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (1988-1994) parallels the
prevalence of symptomatic sleep apnea in general random samples. Finally, the
beneficial effect of a cytokine antagonist on EDS in obese, male apneics and that
of exercise on SDB in a general random sample, supports the hypothesis that
cytokines and insulin resistance are mediators of EDS and sleep apnea in humans. 
In conclusion, accumulating evidence provides support to our model of the
bi-directional, feed forward, pernicious association between sleep apnea,
sleepiness, inflammation, and insulin resistance, all promoting atherosclerosis
and cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 15893251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arch Intern Med. 2005 Apr 25;165(8):910-5.

The association of obesity, cytokine levels, and depressive symptoms with diverse
measures of fatigue in healthy subjects.

Lim W(1), Hong S, Nelesen R, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul,
South Korea. wlim@ucsd.edu

BACKGROUND: Fatigue is a common symptom, even among healthy individuals, but
little is understood about it. We examined the associations among adiposity,
depressive symptoms, cytokine levels, and multidimensional fatigue symptoms in
otherwise healthy subjects. Furthermore, we examined whether obesity would
account for a significant portion of fatigue and, if so, what kind of fatigue
complaints appear to be related to obesity.
METHODS: Seventy healthy subjects (36 women and 34 men) with an average age of
36.0 years and at less than or equal to 170% of ideal body weight participated in
the study. Participants had their height, weight, neck circumference, ratio of
the waist to hip circumference, percentage of body fat, and plasma interleukin 6 
and soluble intercellular adhesion molecule 1 concentrations measured. Their
sleep was monitored with an overnight polysomnogram, and subjects completed the
short form of the Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory, which measures 5
domains of fatigue, and the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression Scale.
RESULTS: Obesity, as measured by body mass index (calculated as weight in
kilograms divided by the square of height in meters) and percentage of body fat, 
was associated with general fatigue. Depression scores were significantly related
to all subscales of fatigue; the highest correlation was shown with emotional
fatigue. The effect of obesity on physical fatigue was significant, even after
controlling for depression. In general, interleukin 6 and soluble intercellular
adhesion molecule-1 levels were unrelated to measures of fatigue.
CONCLUSIONS: Obesity, cytokine concentrations, and depressive symptoms explained 
different dimensions of fatigue as measured by the short form of the
Multidimensional Fatigue Symptom Inventory. Obesity accounted for a significant
portion of physical fatigue after controlling for depressive symptoms and
circulating levels of interleukin 6 and soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule-1.

PMID: 15851643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Am J Hypertens. 2005 Mar;18(3):308-18.

Regression of carotid atherosclerosis by control of morning blood pressure peak
in newly diagnosed hypertensive patients.

Marfella R(1), Siniscalchi M, Nappo F, Gualdiero P, Esposito K, Sasso FC,
Cacciapuoti F, Di Filippo C, Rossi F, D'Amico M, Giugliano D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric and Metabolic Diseases, Second University of Naples,
Naples, Italy. raffaele.marfella@unina2.it

Erratum in
    Am J Hypertens. 2005 Oct;18(10):1384. Dosage error in article text.

BACKGROUND: Morning blood pressure (BP) peak may be a risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. Whether morning BP should be a target of hypertension
treatment is not known. We investigated the relationship between morning BP
variations, carotid internal-medial thickness (CIMT), circulating inflammatory
markers, and sympathetic activity in hypertensive patients with different
patterns of morning BP increase at baseline and after antihypertensive treatment.
METHODS: One hundred twenty-eight hypertensive patients with morning BP peak
(MP+) were compared with 196 hypertensive patients without morning BP peak (MP-).
All patients performed 24-h ambulatory BP monitoring, assessment of CIMT,
circulating concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP), interleukin-6 (IL-6),
interleukin-18 (IL-18), and urinary catecholamines.
RESULTS: Compared with MP- patients, MP+ patients had higher CIMT and urinary
catecholamine output (P < .001), as well as CRP, IL-6, and IL-18 (P < .001). We
randomly assigned 128 drug-naive MP+ patients to either metoprolol or carvedilol,
two antihypertensive drugs with different effects on sympathetic activity. The
primary outcome was change in CIMT and circulating inflammatory markers at 12
months. Morning BP decreased more among patients in the carvedilol group (P <
.001), whereas clinic BP showed a similar decrease in both groups. The CIMT (P < 
.001), IL-6 (P < .001), IL-18 (P < .001), and CRP (P < .001) decreased more in
the carvedilol group than in the metoprolol group. The CIMT regression was
observed in 49% of patients in the carvedilol group and 18% of patients in the
metoprolol group (P < .01). Reduction in CIMT was directly associated with
changes in morning BP.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher CIMT and circulating inflammatory markers coexist in
hypertensive patients with morning BP peak, and might contribute to their
increased cardiovascular risk. Carotid atherosclerosis can be prevented by
control of morning BP.

PMID: 15797646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Psychosom Med. 2005 Mar-Apr;67(2):187-94.

Inflammatory markers and sleep disturbance in major depression.

Motivala SJ(1), Sarfatti A, Olmos L, Irwin MR.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, UCLA Neuropsychiatric Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. smotivala@mednet.ucla.edu

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to determine whether immune activation occurs
in major depression, and to evaluate the associations between disordered sleep
and markers of inflammation in patients with major depressive disorder.
METHODS: All-night polysomnography was obtained in patients with acute Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition major depressive disorder
(n = 22) and age-, gender-, and body weight-matched comparison controls (n = 18).
After the onset of sleep, nocturnal serum levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6), soluble
intercellular adhesion molecule (sICAM), monocyte chemotactic protein (MCP-1),
and IL-6 soluble receptor (IL-6sR) were sampled.
RESULTS: As compared with matched controls, depressed patients showed significant
(p <.05) nocturnal elevations of circulating levels of IL-6 and sICAM. Both sleep
latency and rapid eye movement (REM) density had moderate correlations with IL-6 
and sICAM (r's > or = 0.30). Backward regression analyses indicated that sleep
latency (beta = 0.34, p <.05) and REM density (beta = 0.27, p = .09) were better 
predictors of IL-6 than depressive status. Similarly, sleep latency (beta = 0.27,
p = .06) and REM density (beta = 0.32, p = .02) were also better predictors of
sICAM.
CONCLUSION: These findings support the hypothesis that sleep disturbance is
associated with elevated levels of the inflammatory markers IL-6 and sICAM. This 
relationship was not accounted for by other confounding factors such as age and
body weight. These findings suggest that the elevations in inflammatory markers
found in depressive subjects may be partially the result of disturbances of sleep
initiation found in this population.

PMID: 15784782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;11(5):1757-64.

Elevated serum cytokines correlated with altered behavior, serum cortisol rhythm,
and dampened 24-hour rest-activity patterns in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer.

Rich T(1), Innominato PF, Boerner J, Mormont MC, Iacobelli S, Baron B, Jasmin C, 
Lévi F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Virginia Health System,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. tar4d@virginia.edu

PURPOSE: Incapacitating symptom burden in cancer patients contributes to poor
quality of life (QOL) and can influence treatment outcomes because of poor
tolerance to therapy. In this study, the role of circulating cytokines in the
production symptoms in cancer patients is evaluated.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Eighty patients with metastatic colorectal cancer with
either normal (group I, n = 40) or dampened (group II, n = 40) 24-hour
rest/activity patterns measured by actigraphy were identified. Actigraphy
patterns were correlated with QOL indices, serum cortisol obtained at 8:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. and with serum levels of transforming growth factor-alpha, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha, and interleukin 6 (IL-6) obtained at 8:00 a.m. and
analyzed in duplicate by ELISA. Cytokine levels and survival were also
correlated.
RESULTS: Group II patients had significantly higher pre treatment levels of all
three cytokines, displayed significantly poorer emotional and social functioning,
had higher fatigue, more appetite loss, and poorer performance status compared
with group I patients. Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-alpha) and IL-6 were
significantly increased in the patients with WHO performance status >1 and in
those with appetite loss. Fatigue was significantly associated with elevated
TGF-alpha only. IL-6 was increased in those patients with extensive liver
involvement and multiple organ replacement, and it was significantly correlated
with dampened cortisol rhythm. In a multivariate analysis, IL-6 was correlated
with poor treatment outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant correlations were found between serum levels of
TGF-alpha and IL-6, circadian patterns in wrist activity and serum cortisol and
tumor-related symptoms in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. These data 
support the hypothesis that some cancer patient's symptoms of fatigue, poor QOL, 
and treatment outcome are related to tumor or host generated cytokines and could 
reflect cytokine effects on the circadian timing system. This interplay between
cytokine signaling pathways, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, the
autonomic nervous system, and efferent pathways of the suprachiasmatic nucleus
that control circadian physiology, opens the way to new rational interventions
for symptom management in cancer patients.

PMID: 15755997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Med Sci Monit. 2005 Mar;11(3):RA70-5.

Insulin resistance and other metabolic aspects of the obstructive sleep apnea
syndrome.

Harsch IA(1), Hahn EG, Konturek PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg,
Erlangen, Germany. igor.harsch@med1.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) is usually associated with conditions
known to increase insulin resistance and cardiovascular risk, such as
hypertension, obesity, and diabetes. Thus, investigating whether obstructive
sleep apnea itself is an independent risk factor for increased insulin resistance
and whether continuous positive airway pressure treatment (CPAP) might improve
insulin sensitivity brings up considerable methodological problems. Even if
insulin sensitivity improves, it is hard to distinguish between an effect of CPAP
treatment, e.g. in the reduction of nocturnal sympathetic activity caused by the 
sleep disturbance, and concomitant factors, such as weight loss. Two recent
investigations were able to prove that OSAS is an independent risk factor for
insulin resistance: one study in a statistical approach, the other by
demonstrating a significant improvement of insulin sensitivity already two days
after onset of CPAP therapy, thus clearly ruling out such confounding factors as 
changes in lifestyle or weight loss. However, it is still not clear if this
improvement in insulin sensitivity is accompanied by an improvement in the
usually elevated cardiovascular risk of patients with OSAS. Since a decrease in
elevated markers of subclinical inflammation--nowadays regarded as the main
culprit of cardiovascular complications and atherosclerosis--such as
Interleukin-6 and C-reactive protein has been reported during CPAP therapy, and
since an improvement in left ventricular function and a decrease in blood
pressure were also reported under CPAP treatment, there are several good reasons 
to assume an improvement in metabolical function in OSAS patients due to CPAP
treatment.

PMID: 15735578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Pain. 2005 Mar;114(1-2):104-17.

Predicting the failure of disc surgery by a hypofunctional HPA axis: evidence
from a prospective study on patients undergoing disc surgery.

Geiss A(1), Rohleder N, Kirschbaum C, Steinbach K, Bauer HW, Anton F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychobiology, University of Trier, D-54286 Trier, Germany.
andrea.geiss@orthop.gu.se

Patients with postoperative ongoing sciatic pain have been shown to exhibit
reduced cortisol levels along with enhanced IL-6 levels. The aim of the present
study was to clarify the relationship between a reduced cortisol secretion and
enhanced cytokine levels by performing a prospective study on patients with disc 
herniation. Twenty-two patients were examined before and after their disc
surgery. Twelve healthy, pain-free subjects matched for age, education and gender
constituted the control group. The preoperative examinations included the
assessment of the diurnal pattern of cortisol secretion and the feedback
sensitivity of the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. Patients'
subjective stress levels also were assessed during the preoperative examination. 
The diurnal pattern of cortisol secretion was again assessed during the
postoperative examination. Furthermore, blood samples were collected to measure
catecholamine, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)- and interleukin-6 (IL-6)
levels before and after measuring the pressure pain thresholds (PPTs). An
assessment of the sensitivity of circulating monocytes to the immunosuppressive
effects of glucocorticoids was further included in the postoperative
examinations. Failed back syndrome (FBS) patients (n=12) showed a reduced
cortisol secretion in the morning hours and enhanced feedback sensitivity of the 
HPA axis. Furthermore, FBS patients displayed an increased in-vitro production of
proinflammatory cytokines and a relative glucocorticoid resistance of
pro-inflammatory cytokine producing monocytes as compared to non-FBS patients
(n=10) and controls. After PPT measurement FBS patients exhibited an increased
norepinephrine but decreased epinephrine response, together with lower ACTH
levels and a four times higher plasma IL-6 response. These findings suggest that 
chronically stressed patients are at a higher risk for a poor surgical outcome as
their reduced cortisol secretion promotes the postoperative ongoing synthesis of 
proinflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 15733636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 May;90(5):2522-30. Epub 2005 Feb 10.

Major depression is associated with significant diurnal elevations in plasma
interleukin-6 levels, a shift of its circadian rhythm, and loss of physiological 
complexity in its secretion: clinical implications.

Alesci S(1), Martinez PE, Kelkar S, Ilias I, Ronsaville DS, Listwak SJ, Ayala AR,
Licinio J, Gold HK, Kling MA, Chrousos GP, Gold PW.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neuroendocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, 10 Center Drive, Building 10, Room 2D46, MSC 1284,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1284, USA. alescisa@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder (MDD) is associated with increased risk for
premature coronary heart disease and bone loss. Single time measurements of
plasma IL-6, a good predictor of future risk for both cardiovascular disease and 
osteoporosis, revealed significant elevations in depressed patients. The
objective of this study was to rigorously compare plasma IL-6 levels, measured
over 24 h, in MDD patients and healthy controls. Given the activating role of
IL-6 on the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, and the relevance of its
dysregulation in MDD, we also analyzed the relations between IL-6 and cortisol
levels.
METHODS: We studied nine patients and nine controls, individually matched by
gender, age (+/-5 yr), body mass index (+/-2 kg/m2), and menstrual cycle phase.
Diagnosis of MDD was confirmed by structured clinical interview based on the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, Axis I
diagnostic criteria. Self-reported mood ratings were assessed by multiple visual 
analog scales. The rhythmicity and complexity of IL-6 and cortisol secretion were
tested by cosinor analyses, approximate entropy (ApEn) and cross-ApEn algorithms.
RESULTS: MDD patients had significant mean IL-6 elevations from 1000-1200 h and
at 1500 h (P ranging from <0.05 to <0.01) vs. controls. In addition, in MDD, the 
circadian rhythm of IL-6 was shifted by 12 h, and its physiological complexity
was reduced, with no difference in the cross-ApEn of IL-6 and cortisol between
the two groups, and significant time-lagged correlations only in the controls.
IL-6 levels correlated significantly with mood ratings.
CONCLUSIONS: We report profound morning elevations of plasma IL-6 and a reversal 
of its circadian rhythm in MDD patients, in the absence of hypercortisolism.
These findings may be relevant to the increased risk for coronary heart disease
and bone loss in MDD.

PMID: 15705924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Sport Nutr Exerc Metab. 2004 Oct;14(5):501-16.

The effect of single and repeated bouts of prolonged cycling on leukocyte
redistribution, neutrophil degranulation, IL-6, and plasma stress hormone
responses.

Li TL(1), Gleeson M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, Loughborough University, Loughborough, 
LE11 3TU, UK.

This study compared immunoendocrine responses to a single bout of prolonged
cycling at different times of day and to a 2nd bout of cycling at the same
intensity on the same day. In a counterbalanced design, 8 men participated in 3
experimental trials separated by at least 4 d. In the afternoon exercise-only
trial, subjects cycled for 2 h at 60% VO2max starting at 14:00. In the other 2
trials, subjects performed either 2 bouts of cycling at 60% VO2max for 2 h
(starting at 09:00 and 14:00) or a separate resting trial. The single bout of
prolonged exercise performed in the afternoon induced a larger neutrophilia and
monocytosis than the identical bout of morning exercise, possibly the result of
reduced carbohydrate availability and the circadian rhythm in cortisol levels.
The 2nd prolonged exercise bout caused greater immunoendocrine responses but
lower plasma glucose levels and neutrophil function compared with the 1st bout.

PMID: 15673097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Brain Behav Immun. 2005 Mar;19(2):165-72.

The association between interleukin-6, sleep, and demographic characteristics.

Hong S(1), Mills PJ, Loredo JS, Adler KA, Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, USA.
s1hong@ucsd.edu

We examined the relationship between the pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 and sleep
architecture in 70 healthy men and women. Blood was drawn in the early morning
for assessment of IL-6 followed by nocturnal sleep monitoring with
polysomnography. Sleep records were scored for sleep stages using standard
criteria. Morning IL-6 levels were positively correlated with REM latency after
sleep onset [rho = .31, p = .01], percent (%) stage 1 sleep [rho = .23, p =
.053], % wake after sleep onset (WASO) [rho = .29, p<.05]. IL-6 levels were
negatively correlated with sleep efficiency [rho = -.36, p<.01] and slow wave
sleep (SWS) [rho = -.26, p<.05]. After controlling for demographic variables
including race, gender, age, and BMI, multiple hierarchical regression analyses
revealed that morning IL-6 levels accounted for a significant portion of the
variance of REM latency (p<.01), sleep efficiency (p<.01), and % WASO (p = .01). 
IL-6 was no longer associated with % stage 1 sleep, SWS, and total sleep time
after controlling for the demographic characteristics. These findings suggest
that the inflammatory marker IL-6 is associated with sleep quality and that
certain individual characteristics such as race, gender, and age modify that
relationship. Higher IL-6 levels were associated with lower quality of sleep
among healthy asymptomatic men and women.

PMID: 15664789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Physiol. 2005 Mar 15;563(Pt 3):945-55. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

The physiological regulation of toll-like receptor expression and function in
humans.

Lancaster GI(1), Khan Q, Drysdale P, Wallace F, Jeukendrup AE, Drayson MT,
Gleeson M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Sport and Exercise Sciences, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. graeme.lancaster@rmit.edu.au

Eleven mammalian toll-like receptors (TLRs 1-11) have been identified to date and
are known to play a crucial role in the regulation of immune responses; however, 
the factors that regulate TLR expression and function in vivo are poorly
understood. Therefore, in the present study, we investigated the physiological
regulation of TLR expression and function in humans. To examine the influence of 
diurnal rhythmicity on TLR expression and function, peripheral venous blood
samples were collected from healthy volunteers (n = 8) at time points coinciding 
with the peak and nadir in the endogenous circulating cortisol concentration.
While no diurnal rhythmicity in the expression of TLRs 1, 2, 4 or 9 was observed,
the upregulation of costimulatory (CD80 and CD86) and antigen-presenting (MHC
class II) molecules on CD14(+) monocytes following activation with specific TLR
ligands was greater (P < 0.05) in samples obtained in the evening compared with
the morning. To examine the influence of physical stress on TLR expression and
function, peripheral venous blood samples were collected from healthy volunteers 
(n = 11) at rest and following 1.5 h of strenuous exercise in the heat (34
degrees C). Strenuous exercise resulted in a decrease (P < 0.005) in the
expression of TLRs 1, 2 and 4 on CD14(+) monocytes. Furthermore, the upregulation
of CD80, CD86, MHC class II and interleukin-6 by CD14(+) monocytes following
activation with specific TLR ligands was decreased (P < 0.05) in samples obtained
following exercise compared with at rest. These results demonstrate that TLR
function is subject to modulation under physiological conditions in vivo and
provide evidence for the role of immunomodulatory hormones in the regulation of
TLR function.

PMCID: PMC1665604
PMID: 15661814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Ann Rheum Dis. 2005 Feb;64(2):212-6.

Circadian melatonin and cortisol levels in rheumatoid arthritis patients in
winter time: a north and south Europe comparison.

Cutolo M(1), Maestroni GJ, Otsa K, Aakre O, Villaggio B, Capellino S, Montagna P,
Fazzuoli L, Veldi T, Peets T, Hertens E, Sulli A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Genoa, Viale Benedetto XV 6, 16136 Genoa, Italy. mcutolo@unige.it

BACKGROUND: Altered functioning of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and
altered melatonin production might modulate the circadian symptoms in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the influence of different winter photoperiods on the
circadian rhythms of serum melatonin, cortisol, tumour necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha), and interleukin 6 (IL6) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis from a 
north Europe country (Estonia) and a south Europe country (Italy).
METHODS: The patients from Estonia (n = 19) and Italy (n = 7) had similar disease
severity and duration and were compared with healthy age and sex matched controls
in the two countries. Blood samples were collected during the period January to
February at 8 pm, 10 pm, midnight, 2 am, 4 am, 6 am, 8 am, and 3 pm. Melatonin
was measured by radioimmunoassay using (125)I-melatonin. Serum cortisol,
TNFalpha, and IL6 cytokines were assayed by standard methods.
RESULTS: Higher circadian melatonin concentrations from 10 pm and an earlier peak
were observed in Estonian patients than in their age and sex matched controls
(p<0.01). Starting from midnight, melatonin concentrations were significantly
higher in the Estonian patients than in the Italian patients. No significant
differences were observed for serum cortisol. Serum TNFalpha was higher (p<0.05) 
in Estonian patients than in their controls and was correlated with the melatonin
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: In a north European country (Estonia), the circadian rhythm of serum
concentrations of melatonin and TNFalpha in patients with rheumatoid arthritis
were significantly higher than in matched controls or in rheumatoid patients from
a south Europe country (Italy).

PMCID: PMC1755372
PMID: 15647428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Med Hypotheses. 2005;64(2):385-7.

Low-insulin-response diets may decrease plasma C-reactive protein by influencing 
adipocyte function.

McCarty MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NutriGuard Research, 1051 Hermes Ave., Encinitas, CA 92024, USA.
mccarty@pantox.com

Hepatic production of many acute phase reactants, including C-reactive protein
(CRP), is induced primarily by interleukin-6 (IL-6). A significant fraction of
the plasma pool of IL-6 derives from adipocytes. Physiological concentrations of 
insulin as well as of catecholamines have been shown to boost adipocyte
production of IL-6 dose-dependently. High fasting and postprandial insulin levels
can increase adipocyte exposure to catcholamines by activating the sympathetic
nervous system, as well as by provoking postabsorptive hypoglycemia that triggers
adrenal secretion of epinephrine. It follows that diets which promote low diurnal
insulin levels - by minimizing the stimulus to postprandial insulin release, and 
by aiding muscle insulin sensitivity - should be associated with lower CRP
levels. In fact, recent epidemiology demonstrates a correlation between dietary
glycemic load and serum CRP in women, and a recent clinical study reports a 28%
reduction in serum CRP following adoption of a whole-food vegan diet rich in
soluble fiber. Whether very-low-fat diets which promote insulin sensitivity - and
thus down-regulate insulin secretion - can influence CRP, remains to be seen.
These considerations suggest that it may be possible to achieve worthwhile
reductions in CRP by avoiding high-insulin-response starchy foods and by
ingesting more soluble fiber, in foods or as a meal-time supplement.

PMID: 15607574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Hypertens. 2004 Nov;22(11):2087-93.

Relation of nocturnal blood pressure dipping to cellular adhesion, inflammation
and hemostasis.

von Känel R(1), Jain S, Mills PJ, Nelesen RA, Adler KA, Hong S, Perez CJ,
Dimsdale JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, California
92093-0804, USA.

BACKGROUND: Subjects who fail to dip their nocturnal blood pressure (BP) are at
substantially increased risk for cardiovascular diseases. The pathogenetic
mechanisms of this relationship have not been elucidated. We investigated whether
non-dipping would relate to procoagulant and proinflammatory activity.
DESIGN: Study participants were 76 unmedicated normotensive and hypertensive
subjects (44 male, 32 female; 41 white, 35 black; mean age, 36 +/- 8 years) who
underwent 24-h outpatient ambulatory BP monitoring. Based on whether their
average nocturnal systolic BP relative to their average daytime systolic BP
declined by less than 10%, 34 subjects were categorized as non-dippers. D-dimer, 
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1, von Willebrand factor, soluble intercellular
adhesion molecule-1, and interleukin-6 were measured in plasma.
RESULTS: Multivariate analyses showed that D-dimer (median/interquartile range,
242/162-419 ng/ml versus 175/132-254 ng/ml; P=0.041), plasminogen activator
inhibitor-1 (36/19-61 ng/ml versus 17/6-44 ng/ml; P=0.010), von Willebrand factor
(122/91-179% versus 92/66-110%; P=0.001), and soluble intercellular adhesion
molecule-1(227/187-291 ng/ml versus 206/185-247 ng/ml; P=0.044) were all higher
in non-dippers than in dippers. Adjustment for gender, ethnicity, age, body mass 
index, smoking status, hypertension status, and social class revealed independent
effects of non-dipping. Non-dippers continued to have higher D-dimer (P=0.030)
and von Willebrand factor (P=0.034) than dippers. A similar trend not reaching
statistical significance emerged for soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1
(P=0.055). In contrast, dipping status had no effect on interleukin-6.
CONCLUSION: Nocturnal BP non-dipping is associated with elevated levels of
molecules related to endothelial dysfunction and atherosclerosis. The finding
provides one possible mechanism linking non-dipping with cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 15480091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Cytokine. 2004 Oct 21;28(2):87-91.

The relationship between serum cytokine levels with obesity and obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome.

Ciftci TU(1), Kokturk O, Bukan N, Bilgihan A.

Author information: 
(1)Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Sleep Disorders Center, Ankara, Turkey. 
tansu.ciftci@gazi.edu.tr

Inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) may have a direct effect on glucose and lipid
metabolism. On the other hand, it is known that IL-6 and TNF-alpha are important 
pro-inflammatory cytokines in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The goal of
present study was to test whether sleep apnea contributes to the previously
reported increases of IL-6 and TNF-alpha independent of obesity. Forty-three
obese (body mass index, BMI>27 kg/m2) men with newly diagnosed obstructive sleep 
apnea syndrome (OSAS) (apnea-hypopnea index, AHI> or =5) and age- and BMI-matched
22 obese nonapneic male controls (AHI<5) were enrolled in this study. To confirm 
the diagnosis, all patients underwent standard polysomnography in the sleep
disorders center. Serum samples were taken at 08:00 h in the morning after
overnight fasting. Serum IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels were found significantly
higher in OSAS patients than in controls (p=0.002, p=0.03). Serum IL-6 and
TNF-alpha levels were significantly correlated with AHI in OSAS patients (r=0.03,
p=0.046 and r=0.36, p=0.016). There was no significant correlation between serum 
IL-6, TNF-alpha levels and AHI in controls. Serum IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels were 
not correlated with BMI both in OSAS patients and controls. In conclusion,
circulating IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels in patients with OSAS, as independent of
BMI are significantly higher than levels in controls and there is a positive
relationship between previously mentioned cytokines' levels and the severity of
OSAS. According to these results, the link between cardiovascular morbidity and
OSAS may be explained by the coexistence of other cardiovascular risk factors
such as circulating IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels.

PMID: 15381186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Sep;89(9):4409-13.

Marked decrease in sleepiness in patients with sleep apnea by etanercept, a tumor
necrosis factor-alpha antagonist.

Vgontzas AN(1), Zoumakis E, Lin HM, Bixler EO, Trakada G, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry H073, Pennsylvania State University College of
Medicine, 500 University Drive, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

The proinflammatory cytokines, TNFalpha and IL-6, are elevated in obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA) and have been proposed as mediators of excessive daytime
sleepiness in humans. We tested the effects of etanercept, a medication that
neutralizes TNFalpha and is approved by the FDA for the treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis, in eight obese male apneics. These patients participated in a pilot,
placebo-controlled, double-blind study during which nighttime polysomnography,
multiple sleep latency test, and fasting blood glucose and plasma levels of IL-6,
C-reactive protein, insulin, and adiponectin were obtained. There was a
significant and marked decrease in sleepiness by etanercept, which increased
sleep latency during the multiple sleep latency test by 3.1 +/- 1.0 min (P <
0.05) compared with placebo. Also, the number of apneas/hypopneas per hour was
reduced significantly by the drug compared with placebo (52.8 +/- 9.1 vs. 44.3
+/- 10.3; adjusted difference, -8.4 +/- 2.3; P < 0.05). Furthermore, IL-6 levels 
were significantly decreased after etanercept administration compared with
placebo (3.8 +/- 0.9 vs. 1.9 +/- 0.4 pg/ml; adjusted difference, -1.9 +/- 0.5; P 
< 0.01). However, no differences were observed in etanercept vs. placebo in the
levels of fasting blood glucose and plasma C-reactive protein, insulin, and
adiponectin. We conclude that neutralizing TNFalpha activity is associated with a
significant reduction of objective sleepiness in obese patients with OSA. This
effect, which is about 3-fold higher than the reported effects of continuous
positive airway pressure on objective sleepiness in patients with OSA (0.9 vs.
3.1 min), suggests that proinflammatory cytokines contribute to the pathogenesis 
of OSA/sleepiness.

PMID: 15356039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Med Sci Monit. 2004 Sep;10(9):CR510-5. Epub 2004 Aug 20.

Resistin levels in patients with obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome--the link to
subclinical inflammation?

Harsch IA(1), Koebnick C, Wallaschofski H, Schahin SP, Hahn EG, Ficker JH,
Lohmann T, Konturek PC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Medical Department I, Friedrich-Alexander
University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.
igor.harsch@med1.imed.uni-erlangen.de

BACKGROUND: The role of resistin, a "new" white adipose tissue hormone, still
needs to be established. Its linkage to insulin sensitivity and body mass was
controversial in previous studies.
MATERIAL/METHODS: Twenty obese patients (BMI: 32.1+/-6.9 kg/m2 ) with obstructive
sleep apnoea syndrome (OSAS) (Apnoea-Hypopnoea Index: 48.6+/-19.1, underwent
measurements of resistin, interleukin-6 (IL-6), intracellular adhesion molecule-1
(ICAM-1), CRP and the insulin sensitivity index (ISI) by hyperinsulinaemic
euglycaemic clamp before, 2 days and 2 months after onset of CPAP treatment.
RESULTS: Resistin remained unchanged during CPAP-therapy and was negatively
correlated to ISI (r=-0.359; p=0.006), the latter was significantly improved by
CPAP (p<0.001). In a correlation matrix, IL-6 and ICAM-1 were significantly
(p=0.001) correlated to resistin (p=0.614 and 0.427). Changes of inflammatory
markers under CPAP treatment were related to AHI, as well as resistin changes.
CONCLUSIONS: In agreement with previous investigations, we could only demonstrate
a weak linkage between ISI and resistin. However, at least in obese patients with
OSAS, there is a close relation to subclinical inflammation (IL-6) and
endothelial activation (ICAM-1).

PMID: 15328483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mayo Clin Proc. 2004 Aug;79(8):1036-46.

Obstructive sleep apnea and cardiovascular disease.

Parish JM(1), Somers VK.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Disorders Center and Division of Pulmonary Medicine and Internal
Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Scottsdale, Ariz 85259, USA.

Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a common medical condition that occurs in
approximately 5% to 15% of the population. The pathophysiology of OSA is
characterized by repetitive occlusions of the posterior pharynx during sleep that
obstruct the airway, followed by oxyhemoglobin desaturation, persistent
inspiratory efforts against the occluded airway, and termination by arousal from 
sleep. Obstructive sleep apnea is associated with daytime sleepiness and fatigue,
likely due to fragmented sleep from recurrent arousals. Substantial evidence
shows that patients with OSA have an increased incidence of hypertension compared
with individuals without OSA and that OSA is a risk factor for the development of
hypertension. Recent studies show that OSA may be implicated in stroke and
transient ischemic attacks. Obstructive sleep apnea appears to be associated with
coronary heart disease, heart failure, and cardiac arrhythmias. Pulmonary
hypertension may be associated with OSA, especially in patients with preexisting 
pulmonary disease. Although the exact cause that links OSA with cardiovascular
disease is unknown, there is evidence that OSA is associated with a group of
proinflammatory and prothrombotic factors that have been identified to be
important in the development of atherosclerosis. Obstructive sleep apnea is
associated with increased daytime and nocturnal sympathetic activity. Autonomic
abnormalities seen in patients with OSA include increased resting heart rate,
decreased R-R interval variability, and increased blood pressure variability.
Both atherosclerosis and OSA are associated with endothelial dysfunction,
increased C-reactive protein, interleukin 6, fibrinogen, and plasminogen
activator inhibitor, and reduced fibrinolytic activity. Obstructive sleep apnea
has been associated with enhanced platelet activity and aggregation. Leukocyte
adhesion and accumulation on endothelial cells are common in both OSA and
atherosclerosis. Clinicians should be aware that OSA may be a risk factor for the
development of cardiovascular disease.

PMID: 15301332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Mutat Res. 2004 Jul 13;551(1-2):65-78.

Assessment of the efficacy of functional food ingredients-introducing the concept
"kinetics of biomarkers".

Verhagen H(1), Coolen S, Duchateau G, Hamer M, Kyle J, Rechner A.

Author information: 
(1)Unilever Health Institute, P.O. Box 114, 3130 AC, Vlaardingen, The
Netherlands. hans.verhagen@unilever.com

Functional foods are "foods and beverages with claimed health benefits based on
scientific evidence". Health claims need to be substantiated scientifically. The 
future of functional foods will heavily rely on proven efficacy in
well-controlled intervention studies with human volunteers. In order to have the 
maximum output of human trials, improvements are needed with respect to study
design and optimization of study protocols. Efficacy at realistic intake levels
needs to be established in studies with humans via the use of suitable
biomarkers, unless the endpoint can be measured directly. The human body is able 
to deal with chemical entities irrespective of their origin, and the
pharmaceutical terms "absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion" have
their equivalent when biomarkers are concerned. Whereas only "diurnal variation" 
or "circadian rhythm" is sometimes considered, little attention is paid to
"kinetics of biomarkers". "Kinetics of biomarkers" comprises "formation,
distribution, metabolism and excretion". However, this is at present neither an
established science nor common practice in nutrition research on functional
foods. As a consequence, sampling times and matrices, for example, are chosen on 
the basis of historical practice and convenience (for volunteers and scientists) 
but not on the basis of in depth insight. The concept of kinetics of biomarkers
is illustrated by a variety of readily comprehensible examples, such as malaria, 
cholesterol, polyphenols, glutathione-S-transferase alpha, F2-isoprostanes,
interleukin-6, and plasma triacylglycerides.

PMID: 15225582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Brain Behav Immun. 2004 Jul;18(4):349-60.

Nocturnal proinflammatory cytokine-associated sleep disturbances in abstinent
African American alcoholics.

Irwin M(1), Rinetti G, Redwine L, Motivala S, Dang J, Ehlers C.

Author information: 
(1)Cousins Center for Psychoneuroimmunology, Neuropsychiatric Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. mirwin1@ucla.edu

Animal studies reveal that cytokines play a key role in the regulation of sleep. 
Alcoholic patients show profound alterations of sleep and a defect in the
homeostatic recovery of sleep following sleep loss. In this study, we
investigated whether nocturnal plasma levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) were associated with disordered sleep in alcohol
dependence by testing the temporal relationships between these inflammatory
cytokines and sleep, before and after sleep deprivation. All-night
polysomnography and serial blood sampling at 23:00, 03:00, and 06:30 h were
conducted across baseline, partial sleep deprivation, and recovery nights in
abstinent African American alcoholics (n=16) and matched controls (n=15). Coupled
with prolonged sleep latency and increased rapid eye movement sleep, alcoholics
showed nocturnal elevations of IL-6 and TNF as compared to controls after
adjustment for alcohol consumption and body mass index. Following sleep
deprivation, alcoholics showed greater nocturnal levels of IL-6 and greater
nocturnal increases of TNF as compared to controls. Pre-sleep IL-6 levels at
23:00 h correlated with prolonged sleep latency after adjustment for potential
confounders whereas IL-6 levels at 03:00 h correlated with rapid eye movement
sleep in the second half of the night. Taken together, these findings indicate
that circulating levels of proinflammatory cytokines may have a negative
influence on sleep initiation. These findings have implications for determining
why sleep is disordered in alcoholics and may aid in the development of novel
treatments to optimize sleep in this population.

PMID: 15157952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Brain Behav Immun. 2004 Jul;18(4):326-32.

Exploring the cytokine and endocrine involvement in narcolepsy.

Okun ML(1), Giese S, Lin L, Einen M, Mignot E, Coussons-Read ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado at Denver, CB 173, POB
173364, Denver, CO 80217-3364, USA.

Narcolepsy is a disabling neurological sleep disorder characterized by excessive 
daytime sleepiness and abnormal REM sleep manifestations. Recently, the role of
cytokines and growth hormone in the regulation of sleep and narcolepsy has been
considered, and data suggest that proinflammatory cytokines may be involved in
sleep and narcoleptic symptoms. Serum and clinical data were obtained from the
Stanford Center for Narcolepsy Research for 39 Narcoleptics (22 Females, 17
Males, age 39+/-14.9) and 40 controls (13 Females, 27 Males, age 46+/-17.9).
Plasma levels of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and human growth hormone (hGH) were measured by
ELISA. TNF-alpha and IL-6 were significantly increased in narcoleptic subjects
compared to controls (p=.001). Interestingly, hGH was significantly increased in 
narcoleptic subjects (p <.0001). There was also a significant difference in the
epworth sleepiness scale (ESS) (17.7+/-4.6 vs. 5.5+/-3.2, p <.0001). These data
indicate that narcoleptics, relative to controls, had higher serum levels of
TNF-alpha, IL-6, and hGH. These data suggest that the dysregulation of sleep
observed in narcoleptics correlates with the immune and endocrine dysregulation
seen in these subjects, and the observed changes may in fact contribute to the
higher likelihood of disturbed sleep and/or increased incidence of infection.
Additional work is required to fully characterize connections between cytokines
and narcoleptic symptomatology.

PMID: 15157949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Chest. 2004 May;125(5):1964-5; author reply 1965.

Increased plasma interleukin-6 is associated with the pathogenesis of obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome.

Teramoto S, Yamamoto H, Ouchi Y.

Comment in
    Chest. 2005 Jun;127(6):2294.

Comment on
    Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1621-2; author reply 1622-3.

PMID: 15136420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 May;89(5):2119-26.

Adverse effects of modest sleep restriction on sleepiness, performance, and
inflammatory cytokines.

Vgontzas AN(1), Zoumakis E, Bixler EO, Lin HM, Follett H, Kales A, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Total sleep restriction in humans is associated with increased daytime
sleepiness, decreased performance, and hormonal/metabolic disturbances. The
effects of mild chronic sleep restriction that mimic real life are not known. To 
assess the effects of modest sleep restriction from 8 to 6 h/night for 1 wk, 25
young, healthy, normal sleepers (12 men and 13 women) were studied for 12
consecutive nights in the sleep laboratory. After 1 wk of sleep restriction,
although subjects' nighttime sleep was deeper, subjects were significantly
sleepier (multiple sleep latency test) and performed worse in four primary
variables of psychomotor vigilance test (both P < 0.01). Furthermore, 24-h
secretion of IL-6 was increased by 0.8 +/- 0.3 pg/ml (P < 0.05) in both sexes,
whereas TNFalpha was increased only in men. Also, the peak cortisol secretion was
lower after sleep restriction than at baseline, and this difference was stronger 
in men (55.18 +/- 24.83 nmol/liter; P < 0.05) than in women (35.87 +/- 24.83
nmol/liter; P < 0.16). We conclude that in young men and women, modest sleep loss
is associated with significant sleepiness, impairment of psychomotor performance,
and increased secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. Given the potential
association of these behavioral and physical alterations with health, well-being,
and public safety, the idea that sleep or parts of it are optional should be
regarded with caution.

PMID: 15126529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2004 Aug;97(2):612-8. Epub 2004 Apr 9.

Changes in neutrophil surface receptor expression, degranulation, and respiratory
burst activity after moderate- and high-intensity exercise.

Peake J(1), Wilson G, Hordern M, Suzuki K, Yamaya K, Nosaka K, Mackinnon L,
Coombes JS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Human Movement Studies, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Intense exercise stimulates the systemic release of a variety of factors that
alter neutrophil surface receptor expression and functional activity. These
alterations may influence resistance to infection after intense exercise. The aim
of this study was to examine the influence of exercise intensity on neutrophil
receptor expression, degranulation (measured by plasma and intracellular
myeloperoxidase concentrations), and respiratory burst activity. Ten well-trained
male runners ran on a treadmill for 60 min at 60% [moderate-intensity exercise
(MI)] and 85% maximal oxygen consumption [high-intensity exercise (HI)]. Blood
was drawn immediately before and after exercise and at 1 h postexercise.
Immediately after HI, the expression of the neutrophil receptor CD16 was
significantly below preexercise values (P < 0.01), whereas MI significantly
reduced CD35 expression below preexercise values (P < 0.05). One hour after
exercise at both intensities, there was a significant decline in CD11b expression
(P < 0.05) and a further decrease in CD16 expression compared with preexercise
values (P < 0.01). CD16 expression was lower 1 h after HI than 1 h after MI (P < 
0.01). Immediately after HI, intracellular myeloperoxidase concentration was less
than preexercise values (P < 0.01), whereas plasma myeloperoxidase concentration 
was greater (P < 0.01), indicating that HI stimulated neutrophil degranulation.
Plasma myeloperoxidase concentration was higher immediately after HI than after
MI (P < 0.01). Neutrophil respiratory burst activity increased after HI (P <
0.01). In summary, both MI and HI reduced neutrophil surface receptor expression.
Although CD16 expression was reduced to a greater extent after HI, this reduction
did not impair neutrophil degranulation and respiratory burst activity.

PMID: 15075305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Endocrinol Invest. 2004 Jan;27(1):37-41.

Serum interleukin-6 predicts cortisol release in acute stroke patients.

Szczudlik A(1), Dziedzic T, Bartus S, Slowik A, Kieltyka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Collegium Medicum, Jagiellonian University, Krakow,
Poland.

Altered hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis was reported in stroke patients;
however, mechanisms responsible for this phenomenon are barely understood. Acute 
cerebral ischemia triggers interleukin-6 (IL-6) release into blood. Circulating
IL-6 can stimulate hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis. The goal of our study was 
to assess a relationship between serum IL-6 and cortisol in acute ischemic
stroke. Twenty two patients with ischemic stroke and 17 controls were included.
Serum samples were collected on the 2nd day of stroke at 6:00, 10:00 18:00, 22:00
h and at the same time points in control group. Cytokines and cortisol levels
were measured using ELISA method. Serum IL-6 and cortisol levels were higher in
stroke patients than in controls. Cortisol displayed diurnal variations in both
stroke patients and controls. In contrast with control subjects, serum IL-6
levels did not display diurnal variations in stroke patients. In stroke patients,
but not in controls, IL-6 level correlated significantly with cortisol level and 
morning serum IL-6 level independently predicted evening/night cortisol level. In
conclusion, brain ischemia could stimulate IL-6 release in blood and in this way 
modulate hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis.

PMID: 15053241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Cytokine. 2004 Apr 21;26(2):89-93.

Light/dark patterns of interleukin-6 in relation to the pineal hormone melatonin 
in patients with acute myocardial infarction.

Dominguez-Rodriguez A(1), Abreu-Gonzalez P, Garcia M, Ferrer J, de la Rosa A,
Vargas M, Reiter RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Spain.
pabreu@ull.es

AIMS: Atherosclerosis is a chronic disease that, from its origin to its ultimate 
complications, involves inflammatory cells, inflammatory proteins, and
inflammatory responses from vascular cells. It has been demonstrated that
cytokine activities are under neuroendocrine control, in part exerted by the
pineal gland through the circadian secretion of its main product melatonin.
Melatonin is mainly released during the night, but the precise relationship
between melatonin and the light/dark rhythm of interleukin-6 in patients with
acute myocardial infarction is still unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The study included 60 patients diagnosed with acute
myocardial infarction and 60 healthy volunteers whose venous blood samples were
collected at 09:00 h (light period) and 02:00 h (dark period). Our results
demonstrate that interleukin-6 concentrations presented a light/dark pattern with
mean serum concentrations being higher in the acute myocardial infarction group
than in the control group (101.26 +/- 13.43 and 52.67 +/- 7.73 pg/ml at 02:00 h, 
41.93 +/- 5.90 and 22.98 +/- 4.49 pg/ml at 09:00 h, respectively, p < 0.05).
Differences in the day/night changes in melatonin levels in control subjects
(48.19 +/- 7.82 at 02:00 h, 14.51+/- 2.36 at 09:00 h, pg/ml) and acute myocardial
infarction patients (25.97 +/- 3.90 at 02:00 h, 12.29 +/- 4.01 at 09:00 h, pg/ml)
(p < 0.05) were a result of a reduced nocturnal elevation of melatonin in the
acute myocardial infarction group.
CONCLUSIONS: The current findings suggest that the circadian secretion of
melatonin may be responsible at least in part for light/dark variations of
endogenous interleukin-6 production in patients with acute myocardial infarction.
In this study, the melatonin seems to have an anti-inflammatory effect.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 15050609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Diabetes Care. 2004 Mar;27(3):813-23.

Inflammation and activated innate immunity in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes.

Pickup JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Unit, Guy's, King's and St. Thomas's School of Medicine, Guy's
Hospital, London, UK. john.pickup@kcl.ac.uk

There is increasing evidence that an ongoing cytokine-induced acute-phase
response (sometimes called low-grade inflammation, but part of a widespread
activation of the innate immune system) is closely involved in the pathogenesis
of type 2 diabetes and associated complications such as dyslipidemia and
atherosclerosis. Elevated circulating inflammatory markers such as C-reactive
protein and interleukin-6 predict the development of type 2 diabetes, and several
drugs with anti-inflammatory properties lower both acute-phase reactants and
glycemia (aspirin and thiazolidinediones) and possibly decrease the risk of
developing type 2 diabetes (statins). Among the risk factors for type 2 diabetes,
which are also known to be associated with activated innate immunity, are age,
inactivity, certain dietary components, smoking, psychological stress, and low
birth weight. Activated immunity may be the common antecedent of both type 2
diabetes and atherosclerosis, which probably develop in parallel. Other features 
of type 2 diabetes, such as fatigue, sleep disturbance, and depression, are
likely to be at least partly due to hypercytokinemia and activated innate
immunity. Further research is needed to confirm and clarify the role of innate
immunity in type 2 diabetes, particularly the extent to which inflammation in
type 2 diabetes is a primary abnormality or partly secondary to hyperglycemia,
obesity, atherosclerosis, or other common features of the disease.

PMID: 14988310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Respiration. 2004 Jan-Feb;71(1):24-9.

Interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha in patients with obstructive sleep 
apnea-hypopnea syndrome.

Imagawa S(1), Yamaguchi Y, Ogawa K, Obara N, Suzuki N, Yamamoto M, Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Ibaraki, Japan. simagawa@md.tsukuba.ac.jp

Comment in
    Respiration. 2004 Jan-Feb;71(1):20-1.

BACKGROUND: In previous studies, significantly elevated levels of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) have been reported in patients with severe
obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome (OSAHS). On the other hand, plasma
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) have been
significantly higher in mild sleep apneics than in normal controls. However, this
study included a small number of patients and milder cases of OSAHS.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: To assess the involvement of IL-6 and TNF-alpha in VEGF
increases in patients with severe OSAHS, serum levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha were 
determined in patients with severe OSAHS (n=110) and compared to those of
controls (n=45) using an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: No significant increase in IL-6 or TNF-alpha was detected in the present
study cohort. However, the body mass index was significantly correlated with the 
severity of the apnea-hypopnea index.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the elevation in VEGF is not directly
related to IL-6 or TNF-alpha levels. However, the question of whether VEGF is the
cause or the result of OSAHS remains to be determined. Further studies are needed
to clarify the role of IL-6 and TNF-alpha in the pathogenesis of OSAHS, in which 
obesity should be entered as an independent factor.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14872107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Respiration. 2004 Jan-Feb;71(1):20-1.

Inflammatory ideas about sleep apnea.

Cherniack NS.

Comment on
    Respiration. 2004 Jan-Feb;71(1):24-9.

PMID: 14872105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mil Med. 2003 Dec;168(12):1034-8.

Immune and hormonal changes following intense military training.

Gomez-Merino D(1), Chennaoui M, Burnat P, Drogou C, Guezennec CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institut de Médecine Aérospatiale du Service de
Santé des Armies, BP 73, 91223 Brétigny-sur-Orge, Cedex France.

This study was designed to determine whether the immune and hormonal systems were
affected by a 5-day military course following 3 weeks of combat training in a
population of 26 male soldiers (mean age, 21 +/- 2 years). The combination of
continuous heavy physical activity and sleep deprivation led to energy
deficiency. At the beginning of the training program and immediately after the
combat course, saliva samples were assayed for secretory immunoglobulin A and
plasma samples were assayed for interleukin-6, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate,
prolactin, catecholamines, glucocorticoids, and testosterone. Secretory
immunoglobulin A was lower and circulating interleukin-6 was increased by the end
of the course, which was attributed to sympathoadrenergic stimulation.
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, prolactin, and testosterone levels fell
significantly. These results suggest that prolonged and repeated exercise such as
that encountered in a military training program induces immune impairment via a
decrease in mucosal immunity and a release of interleukin-6 into the circulation.
The impaired secretion of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and prolactin, two
immunomodulatory hormones, was thought to be a response to the chronic stressors.
Lowered testosterone reflects a general decrease in steroid synthesis as a
consequence of the physical and psychological strain.

PMID: 14719632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Sleep Res. 2003 Dec;12(4):305-11.

Plasma cytokine levels in patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a
preliminary study.

Alberti A(1), Sarchielli P, Gallinella E, Floridi A, Floridi A, Mazzotta G,
Gallai V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurologic Clinic Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy. andrea_alberti@hotmail.com

The levels of some pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines [interleukin (IL)-1beta, 
tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, IL-6, IL-10, and transforming growth factor
(TGF)-beta], were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method in
the plasma of patients affected by obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) at
22:00 hours before polysomnographic recording and immediately after the first
obstructive apnea causing an SaO2 below 85%. Significantly higher levels of
TNF-alpha were found in OSAS patients assessed before polysomnography compared
with the control group (P < 0.01). A slight but significant increase in the
plasma levels of IL-6 was also present (P < 0.05). Conversely, a significant
decrease in the plasma levels of IL-10 was evident at baseline in OSAS patients
(P < 0.04). No significant difference emerged between the mean values of
IL-1alpha and TGF-beta between OSAS patients and controls. The present data
support a prevailing activation of the Th1-type cytokine pattern in OSAS
patients, which is not associated with the severity and duration of OSAS. This
can have important consequences for the outcome of OSAS patients, especially with
regard to the increased risk for developing atherosclerosis and cardiovascular
and cerebrovascular diseases. Immediately after the first obstructive apnea
causing an SaO2 <85%, a significant variation was observed in the plasma levels
of TNF-alpha in OSAS patients compared with those measured before the beginning
of polysomnographic recording (P < 0.001). The role played by this further
increase in TNF-alpha levels after the obstructive apnea in OSAS patients remains
to be established in the light of the pathogenic mechanisms of this sleep
disorder.

PMID: 14633242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Psychiatr Res. 2003 Nov-Dec;37(6):463-70.

Hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal function in patients with depressive disorders is
correlated with baseline cytokine levels, but not with cytokine responses to
hydrocortisone.

Schuld A(1), Schmid DA, Haack M, Holsboer F, Friess E, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 10, D-80804, Munich,
Germany. schuld@mpipsykl.mpg.de

Dysfunction of the hyopthalamo-pituitary adrenal (HPA) system is frequently found
in major depression. In addition, signs of non-specific inflammatory system
activation have been reported. However, very little is known about interactions
between the HPA and immune systems in depressive patients. To assess HPA system
function, we performed a combined dexamethasone suppression and
corticotropin-releasing hormone stimulation (DEX/CRH) test in 14 depressive
patients. Moreover, baseline nocturnal plasma levels of the inflammatory
cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha were
measured. In addition, the system was challenged with an intraveneous pulsatile
injection of hydrocortisone (1 mg/kg body weight in total) and again cytokine
levels were measured across one night. Baseline TNF-alpha levels were negatively 
correlated with the amount of ACTH released upon CRH stimulation during the
DEX/CRH test. Acute hydrocortisone administration suppressed TNF-alpha and IL-6
levels independently of baseline HPA system activity. We conclude that chronic
HPA system overactivity in depressed patients might compromise the production of 
inflammatory cytokines under baseline conditions. However, the responsivity of
the cytokine production to acutely administered glucocorticoids does not seem to 
correlate with the state of the HPA system.

PMID: 14563377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1621-2; author reply 1622-3.

Interleukin-6, obstructive sleep apnea, and obesity.

Inoue K, Takano H, Yoshikawa T.

Comment in
    Chest. 2004 May;125(5):1964-5; author reply 1965.

Comment on
    Chest. 2002 Oct;122(4):1162-7.

PMID: 14555603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2003 Jun;56(6):555-60.

[Circadian variations in proinflammatory cytokine concentrations in acute
myocardial infarction].

[Article in Spanish]

Domínguez Rodríguez A(1), Abreu González P, García MJ, de la Rosa A, Vargas M,
Marrero F.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Cardiología. Hospital Universitario Nuestra Señora de Candelaria. 
Santa Cruz de Tenerife. España.

INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVES: The concentration of certain proinflammatory
cytokines has been found to be elevated in patients with acute coronary syndrome.
Many studies have shown that coronary ischemic accidents do not show a uniform
distribution throughout the day, but instead exhibit rhythmic variations. The
objective of this study is to determine whether there is a circadian pattern of
variation in the concentrations of proinflammatory cytokines in patients with
acute myocardial infarction.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: The sample included 40 patients with acute myocardial
infarction and 40 controls. Levels of interleukin 6 and 1 beta were determined in
the first 24 hours after the acute coronary ischemic episode. Blood samples were 
extracted at 3:00 a.m. (period of darkness) and at 10:00 a.m. (period of
daylight).
RESULTS: Both groups were similar in age, sex distribution, and coronary risk
factors. Interleukin 6 levels showed a significant variation between daylight and
nighttime concentrations in patients with acute myocardial infarction and
controls (41.93 5.90/100.39 13.60 vs 25.76 4.45/52.67 7.73 pg/ml). However,
interleukin 6 concentrations were higher in the acute myocardial infarction group
than in the control group. Interleukin 1 beta concentrations did not vary between
daylight and darkness.
CONCLUSIONS: In both the control group and acute myocardial infarction group,
interleukin 6 concentrations varied between daylight and darkness. Patients with 
acute myocardial infarction shown a higher concentration of interleukin 6
secondary to the physiological response to tissue damage. Circadian variations
can affect the measurements obtained for different physiological and biochemical 
parameters.

PMID: 12783730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 May;88(5):2087-95.

Impaired nighttime sleep in healthy old versus young adults is associated with
elevated plasma interleukin-6 and cortisol levels: physiologic and therapeutic
implications.

Vgontzas AN(1), Zoumakis M, Bixler EO, Lin HM, Prolo P, Vela-Bueno A, Kales A,
Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania
State University College of Medicine, Hershey, Pennsylvania 17033, USA.
axv3@psu.edu

IL-6 and TNF alpha secretion is increased by sleep loss or restriction. IL-6
secretion progressively increases with age, yet its association with decreased
quality and quantity of sleep in old adults is unknown. This study examined the
alteration of 24-h secretory pattern of IL-6, TNF alpha, and cortisol in 15 young
and 13 old normal sleepers who were recorded in the sleep laboratory for four
consecutive nights. Serial 24-h plasma measures of IL-6, TNF alpha, and cortisol 
were obtained during the fourth day, and daytime sleepiness was assessed with the
multiple sleep latency test. Old adults, compared with young subjects, slept
poorly at night (wake time and percentage stage 1 sleep were increased, whereas
their percentage slow wave sleep and percentage sleep time were decreased, P <
0.05). Accordingly, their daytime sleep latency was longer than in young adults
(P < 0.05). The mean 24-h IL-6 and cortisol levels were significantly higher in
old than young adults (P < 0.05). In both groups, IL-6 and cortisol plasma
concentrations were positively associated with total wake time, with a stronger
association of IL-6 and cortisol with total wake time in the older individuals (P
< 0.05); their combined effect was additive. IL-6 had a negative association with
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep only in the young (P < 0.05), but cortisol was
associated negatively with REM sleep both in the young and old, with a stronger
effect in the young. We conclude that in healthy adults, age-related alterations 
in nocturnal wake time and daytime sleepiness are associated with elevations of
both plasma IL-6 and cortisol concentrations, but REM sleep decline with age is
primarily associated with cortisol increases.

PMID: 12727959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Acta Med Croatica. 2002;56(3):109-18.

[Intrauterine hypoxia and sudden infant death syndrome].

[Article in Croatian]

Habek D(1), Habek JC, Jugović D, Salihagić A.

Author information: 
(1)Odjel za ginekologiju i opstetriciju Klinicke bolnice Osijek, J. Huttlera 4
31000 Osijek, Hrvatska.

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) or crib or cot death are synonyms for the
sudden, unexpected and unexplained death of an infant. The incidence of SIDS has 
been estimated to be from 1-2% to 3%. Protracted intrauterine hypoxia or
recurrent hypoxic insults during fetal life undoubtedly influence the development
of the central nervous structures as a tissue most susceptible to hypoxia,
although well developed mechanisms of defense against hypoxia exist during the
fetal life. The mechanisms underlying SIDS include neurologically compromised
infants who are deprived of compensatory mechanisms during sleep, sustaining a
hypoxic insult with alterations in neurotransmitter receptors within the regions 
involved in chemoreception and cardiovascular control. Changes in the brain
result from perinatal prolonged hypoxia (persistent reticular pathways in the
pons and medulla, astroglia in the brainstem, gliosis of brain nerve nuclei,
defects in neurotransmitter receptors, neuronal apoptosis, microthrombosis, and
hypoxic ischemic lesion). Hypoxic perinatal risk factors for SIDS included
passive and active exposure to cigarette smoking in pregnancy, abuse of drugs,
alcohol, coffee and medication in pregnancy, intrauterine growth retardation,
perinatal hypoxia with or without resuscitation, preeclampsia, anemia in
pregnancy, prematurity, multiparity, multiple pregnancy, pregnant women aged < 20
years and > 35 years, cardiocirculatory, pulmonary and endocrine diseases in
pregnancy, and short time interval between two pregnancies. As cigarette smoking 
has been demonstrated to lead to fetoplacental insufficiency, which result in
fetal hypoxia, it is concluded that hypoxia is a precondition for the occurrence 
of SIDS. Prenatal exposure to cigarette smoke decreases maternal red blood cell
count, and concentrations of tyrosine and selenium, reduces fetal and neonatal
cerebral blood flow, and increases maternal MCV, leukocytosis, especially
neutrophils, monocytes and lymphocytes, maternal and fetal heart rate, systolic
and diastolic blood pressure, resistance index in umbilical artery, fetal
hemoglobin, cytokine, serotonine, dopamine, catecholamine, hypoxanthine,
endorphin and interleukin-6. Pregnancy at a risk of hypoxia, especially in heavy 
smokers, is a major risk factor for SIDS, and such pregnancy requires close and
intensive antenatal monitoring.

PMID: 12630342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Circulation. 2003 Mar 4;107(8):1129-34.

Elevated levels of C-reactive protein and interleukin-6 in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome are decreased by nasal continuous positive
airway pressure.

Yokoe T(1), Minoguchi K, Matsuo H, Oda N, Minoguchi H, Yoshino G, Hirano T,
Adachi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP) and interleukin (IL)-6 are important risk
factors for atherosclerosis and coronary heart disease. In the present study, we 
examined serum levels of CRP and IL-6, IL-6 production by monocytes, and the
effect of nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS).
METHODS AND RESULTS: After polysomnography, venous blood was collected at 5 AM
from 30 patients with OSAS and 14 obese control subjects. Serum levels of CRP and
IL-6 and spontaneous production of IL-6 by monocytes were investigated. In
addition, the effects of 1 month of nCPAP were studied in patients with moderate 
to severe OSAS. Levels of CRP and IL-6 were significantly higher in patients with
OSAS than in obese control subjects (CRP P<0.001, IL-6 P<0.05). IL-6 production
by monocytes was also higher in patients with OSAS than in obese control subjects
(P<0.01). In patients with OSAS, the primary factors influencing levels of CRP
were severity of OSAS and body mass index and those influencing levels of IL-6
were body mass index and nocturnal hypoxia. nCPAP significantly decreased levels 
of both CRP (P<0.0001) and IL-6 (P<0.001) and spontaneous IL-6 production by
monocytes (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of CRP and IL-6 and spontaneous production of IL-6 by
monocytes are elevated in patients with OSAS but are decreased by nCPAP.
Therefore, OSAS is associated with increased risks for cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality, and nCPAP may be useful for decreasing these risks.

PMID: 12615790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Circulation. 2003 Feb 11;107(5):E40-0.

Increased C-reactive protein and increased plasma interleukin-6 may
synergistically affect the progression of coronary atherosclerosis in obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome.

Teramoto S, Yamamoto H, Ouchi Y.

Comment on
    Circulation. 2002 May 28;105(21):2462-4.

PMID: 12578892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Lipid Res. 2003 Mar;44(3):576-83. Epub 2002 Dec 16.

Postprandial recruitment of neutrophils may contribute to endothelial
dysfunction.

van Oostrom AJ(1), Sijmonsma TP, Verseyden C, Jansen EH, de Koning EJ, Rabelink
TJ, Castro Cabezas M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Atherosclerosis is a low-grade inflammatory disease involving leukocytes, lipids,
and glucose leading to endothelial dysfunction. Since activation of neutrophils
by triglycerides and glucose has been described in vitro, we hypothesized that
the postprandial phase is an inflammatory state affecting leukocytes, possibly
contributing to endothelial dysfunction. We measured postprandial blood leukocyte
counts, cytokines, hydroperoxides (HPOs), and flow-mediated vasodilation (FMD) in
eight healthy males (age 23 +/- 2 years) after a FAT (50 g/m2) and GLUCOSE
challenge (37.5 g/m2), a combination of both (MIXED test), and after WATER. All
tests, except WATER, resulted in significantly impaired FMD (10% reduction)
between t = 1 h and t = 3 h, accompanied by a significant increase of neutrophils
(59% after FAT and 28% after GLUCOSE and MIXED), total plasma HPOs (15 to 31%
increase), and plasma interleukin-8 (IL-8) (50-130% increase). WATER did not
affect FMD, neutrophils, HPOs, or IL-8. Lymphocytes increased gradually in all
tests (40-70% increase at t = 10 h compared with t = 0; P < 0.005), paralleling a
gradual 3- to 5-fold interleukin-6 increase. Monocyte and erythrocyte counts did 
not change in any test. In conclusion, the neutrophil increment during
postprandial lipemia and glycemia with concomitant IL-8 and HPO increases may
contribute to endothelial dysfunction. Lymphocyte increment is a nonspecific
diurnal process. Postprandial intravascular inflammatory changes may be relevant 
for the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12562833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Psychosom Med. 2003 Jan-Feb;65(1):75-85.

Disordered sleep, nocturnal cytokines, and immunity in alcoholics.

Redwine L(1), Dang J, Hall M, Irwin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Alcoholics who are at risk for infectious disease show profound
disturbances of sleep along with decrements of cellular immunity. This study
examined the relationships between sleep, nocturnal expression of
immunoregulatory cytokines, and natural killer (NK) cell activity in alcoholic
patients as compared with control subjects.
METHODS: Alcoholic patients (N = 24) and comparison control subjects (N = 23)
underwent all-night polysomnography and serial blood sampling at 23:00, 03:00,
and 06:30 hours. Stimulated expression of T(H)1 (interferon gamma, IFN-gamma),
anti-inflammatory/T(H)2 (interleukin 10, IL-10), and proinflammatory cytokines
(IL-6) was measured along with NK cell activity across the night.
RESULTS: Alcoholic patients showed lower levels of IL-6 production, suppression
of the IL-6/IL-10 ratio, and a reduction of NK cell activity, coupled with losses
of delta sleep and increases of rapid eye movement sleep, as compared with
control subjects. In addition, alcoholics showed a persistent low ratio of
IFN-gamma/IL-10 and reduced levels of NK cell activity, whereas controls had
increases of these two immune measures across the night. IL-6 also differentially
changed in the two groups; alcoholics showed increases and controls had decreases
of IL-6 from 03:00 hours to 06:30 hours. At 06:30 hours, rapid eye movement sleep
predicted increases of IL-6 and decreases of NK cell activity independent of the 
relative contribution of age and chronic alcohol consumption. At 23:00 hours
before sleep onset, levels of IL-10 predicted subsequent amounts of delta sleep.
CONCLUSIONS: These data further implicate sleep in the regulation of immune
function and suggest that disordered sleep contributes to immune alterations in
patients with chronic alcoholism. Moreover, the association between awake levels 
of the anti-inflammatory/T(H)2 cytokine IL-10 and subsequent amounts of delta
sleep support the notion of a bidirectional interplay between cytokines and sleep
in humans.

PMID: 12554818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Brain Behav Immun. 2002 Dec;16(6):663-74.

Systemic immune parameters and sleep after ultra-low dose administration of IL-2 
in healthy men.

Lange T(1), Marshall L, Späth-Schwalbe E, Fehm HL, Born J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Lübeck, Germany.

A somnogenic function is suspected for various cytokines. Foregoing experiments
in humans indicated a selective increase in the production of interleukin-2
(IL-2) during sleep as compared with nocturnal wakefulness. Here, we examined
whether conversely, IL-2 exerts a promoting influence on sleep. Also, the effects
of IL-2 administered at ultra-low doses on systemic immune and endocrine
parameters were assessed. Eighteen healthy men participated in three night
sessions, receiving subcutaneously at 19:00 h either placebo or recombinant human
IL-2 at doses of 1000 and 10,000 IU/kg bw. Polysomnographical recordings were
obtained between 23:00 and 07:00 h. Blood was collected repeatedly to determine
(i) white blood cell (WBC) counts including the enumeration of monocytes, natural
killer (NK) cells, and lymphocyte subsets, (ii) serum concentrations of IL-2,
soluble IL-2 receptor (sIL-2r), IL-4, IL-6, and interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma), and
(iii) concentrations of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH), cortisol, thyreotropin (TSH),
and growth hormone (GH). Changes after 1000 IU/kg bw IL-2 generally remained
non-significant. However, distinct effects occurred after 10,000 IU/kg bw IL-2,
inducing serum IL-2 concentrations selectively activating the high affinity IL-2 
receptor. At this dose, IL-2 reduced the number of circulating lymphocytes
(including all major subtypes) and NK cells, while counts of monocytes and
neutrophils were increased. IL-4 release was stimulated and IFN-gamma
concentration reduced after IL-2. Also, IL-2 increased the TSH concentration.
There were no hints at a sleep promoting effect of IL-2. Immune changes suggest
that nocturnal IL-2 administration induces a shift towards Th2 mediated defense.

PMID: 12480497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2002 Oct;26(6):1167-70.

Interleukine-6 serum levels correlate with response to antidepressant sleep
deprivation and sleep phase advance.

Benedetti F(1), Lucca A, Brambilla F, Colombo C, Smeraldi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatric Sciences, Istituto Scientifico Ospedale San
Raffaele, School of Medicine, Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Via Stamira
d'Ancona 20, 20127 Milan, Italy. benedetti.francesco@hsr.it

Unstimulated production of interleukine-6 (IL-6) is known to be enhanced in
patients affected by a major depressive episode. Recent studies supported a role 
for basal IL-6 levels in predicting response to antidepressant drug treatments.
In a sample of 10 consecutively admitted drug-free bipolar depressed inpatients, 
we investigated the possible correlation between unstimulated pretreatment
production of IL-6 and antidepressant response to a night of total sleep
deprivation (TSD) followed by a night of sleep phase advance (SPA), a
nonpharmacologic treatment which is known to rapidly improve depressive
symptomatology. Changes in perceived mood during treatment were recorded with
self-administered Visual Analogue Scales (VAS). We observed a significant inverse
correlation between IL-6 serum levels and VAS scores after treatment, meaning
that higher IL-6 values before treatment were associated with worse response.
This finding is in agreement with previous studies about amitriptyline and
lithium antidepressant treatments. Our preliminary finding confirms the clinical 
value of IL-6 baseline concentration as a predictor of response to antidepressant
treatment.

PMID: 12452541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Health Psychol. 2002 Nov;21(6):531-41.

Chronic psychological stress and the regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines: a 
glucocorticoid-resistance model.

Miller GE(1), Cohen S, Ritchey AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130,
USA. gemiller@artsci.wustl.edu

This study examined whether chronic stress impairs the immune system's capacity
to respond to hormonal signals that terminate inflammation. Fifty healthy adults 
were studied; half were parents of cancer patients, and half were parents of
healthy children. Parents of cancer patients reported more psychological distress
than parents of healthy children. They also had flatter diurnal slopes of
cortisol secretion, primarily because of reduced output during the morning hours.
There was also evidence that chronic stress impaired the immune system's response
to anti-inflammatory signals: The capacity of a synthetic glucocorticoid hormone 
to suppress in vitro production of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-6
was diminished among parents of cancer patients. Findings suggest a novel pathway
by which chronic stress might alter the course of inflammatory disease.

PMID: 12433005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. S Afr Med J. 2002 Oct;92(10):794-5.

A possible link between melatonin levels, stress and coronary heart disease.

Gerber AM, Oosthuizen GM, Crous A.

PMID: 12432803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Brain Behav Immun. 2002 Oct;16(5):513-24.

Cytokines, stress, and depressive illness.

Anisman H(1), Merali Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottowa, Ont, Canada K1S 5B6.
hanisman@ccs.carleton.ca

It has been suggested that immune activation, and particularly increased activity
of several cytokines, notably interleukin-1, interleukin-2, interleukin-6, tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha as well as their soluble receptors is characteristic of
depression. Normalization of cytokine activity does not necessarily occur
following successful antidepressant, suggesting that cytokines may be trait
markers of depression, or simply represent bystander effects of the illness. The 
relationship between cytokines and depression is complicated as a variety factors
could directly or indirectly influence cytokine activity. While cytokine
elevations are most pronounced in severe (melancholic) depression, their activity
may also be related to chronicity of illness, neurovegetative features of
depression (altered sleep patterns, food intake, weight changes, fatigue or
general activity), or the high stress perception characteristic of depression.
Although, studies assessing cytokines in depressive populations are basically
correlational in nature, patients receiving cytokine immunotherapy frequently
show depressive symptoms, which may be attenuated by antidepressant medication,
supporting a causal role for cytokines in depressive disorders. The processes
underlying such outcomes remain to be established, but the affective changes may 
stem from the neuroendocrine and central neurochemical changes elicited by
cytokines, as these are reminiscent of those associated thought to subserve
depression.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA)

PMID: 12401465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2002 Nov;27(8):921-31.

Diurnal variations of interleukin-6 plasma levels are confounded by blood drawing
procedures.

Haack M(1), Kraus T, Schuld A, Dalal M, Koethe D, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 10, D-80804, Munich,
Germany.

Recent findings suggest that inflammatory cytokines are involved in sleep
regulation. In part, this idea is based on studies showing that systemic levels
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) are affected by sleep and sleep deprivation. However,
intravenous (IV) catheters used for repetitive blood sampling were reported to
increase local IL-6 production, which might confound sleep-dependent or circadian
changes in the plasma concentrations of this cytokine. To further examine the
effects of blood drawing procedures on IL-6 plasma levels, 12 healthy young male 
subjects participated in a 24-h cross-over study protocol involving sleep and
sleep deprivation. Blood was collected half-hourly through an IV line and one
additional sample was taken by a simple needle stick from the contralateral arm
in parallel to the last sample from the catheter. Difficulties in blood sampling,
the plasma levels of IL-6, cortisol and subjective sleepiness were quantified. In
samples from the IV line there was a linear increase in IL-6 levels in both
conditions, whereas the amount of IL-6 detected in the needle stick sample at the
end did not differ from baseline. IL-6 levels were significantly higher in
samples rated as difficult and those difficulties were more frequent during sleep
compared to nocturnal wakefulness. IL-6 levels did not correlate to variations in
sleepiness or cortisol levels. We conclude that variations in IL-6 plasma levels 
measured in samples from an IV catheter are caused, at least in part, by changes 
in local cytokine production rather than by physiological changes in circulating 
IL-6 levels.

PMID: 12383453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2002 Oct 15;166(8):1055-61.

Immunomodulatory effects of melatonin in asthma.

Sutherland ER(1), Martin RJ, Ellison MC, Kraft M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO, USA. sutherlande@njc.org

Patients with nocturnal asthma demonstrate circadian variations in airway
inflammation. We hypothesized that melatonin, a circadian rhythm regulator,
modulates circadian inflammatory variations in asthma. The effect of melatonin
stimulation on peripheral blood mononuclear cell cytokine production was
evaluated at 4:00 P.M. and 4:00 A.M. in normal control subjects, patients with
nocturnal asthma, and patients with non-nocturnal asthma. Melatonin was
proinflammatory, causing significantly increased production of interleukin-1,
interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha at 4:00 P.M. and 4:00 A.M. in all 
subject groups (range, 12.8 +/- 3.3 to 131.72 +/- 16.4%, p < or = 0.0003). The
observed increases in cytokine production did not change between 4:00 P.M. and
4:00 A.M. in control subjects or in patients with nocturnal asthma (p > 0.05,
both cases). At 4:00 P.M., the cytokine response to melatonin of patients with
nocturnal asthma was greater than that of control subjects or patients with
non-nocturnal asthma and did not change significantly at 4:00 A.M. At 4:00 P.M., 
the cytokine response of patients with non-nocturnal asthma was less than that of
patients with nocturnal asthma and rose significantly at 4:00 A.M. (p = 0.0001,
all comparisons). Melatonin is proinflammatory in both patients with asthma and
healthy subjects. Patients with nocturnal asthma demonstrate the largest daytime 
cytokine response and cannot be further stimulated at 4:00 A.M., suggesting
chronic overstimulation in vivo. These results suggest differential
immunomodulatory effects of melatonin based on asthma clinical phenotype and may 
indicate an adverse effect of exogenous melatonin in asthma.

PMID: 12379548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Chest. 2002 Oct;122(4):1162-7.

Increased 8-isoprostane and interleukin-6 in breath condensate of obstructive
sleep apnea patients.

Carpagnano GE(1), Kharitonov SA, Resta O, Foschino-Barbaro MP, Gramiccioni E,
Barnes PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

Comment in
    Chest. 2003 Oct;124(4):1621-2; author reply 1622-3.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by repeated
episodes of upper airways obstruction during sleep that result in episodes of
hypoxia. An increase of systemic biomarkers of inflammation and oxidative stress 
has been found in patients with OSA and obesity.
DESIGN: The aim of this study was to measure the levels of markers of
inflammation (interleukin [IL]-6) and oxidative stress (8-isoprostane) in the
exhaled breath condensate of OSA and obese patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighteen OSA patients (13 men; mean [+/- SEM] age, 44 +/- 7
years), 10 obese subjects (4 men; mean age, 39 +/- 8 years), and 15 healthy
age-matched subjects (8 men; mean age, 42 +/- 4 years) were recruited. IL-6 and
8-isoprostane were measured in exhaled breath condensate by a specific enzyme
immunoassay kit.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Higher concentrations of IL-6 were found in OSA
patients (8.7 +/- 0.3 pg/mL) than in healthy control subjects (1.6 +/- 0.1 pg/mL;
p < 0.0001). Obese subjects also had higher levels than healthy control subjects,
but lower levels than OSA patients (2.1 +/- 0.2 pg/mL, p < 0.05 and p < 0.0001
respectively). Furthermore, 8-isoprostane levels were found to be higher in OSA
patients (7.4 +/- 0.7 pg/mL) than in obese subjects (5 +/- 0.3 pg/mL; p = 0.4)
and healthy subjects (4.5 +/- 0.5 pg/mL; p < 0.005). We found a positive
correlation between these two markers and neck circumference and apnea/hypopnea
index.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that inflammation and oxidative stress are
characteristic in the airways of OSA patients but not in obese subjects, and that
their levels depend on the severity of the OSA. The measurement of IL-6 and
8-isoprostane levels may prove to be useful in screening and monitoring obese
patients who have a high risk of developing OSA.

PMID: 12377837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Psychosom Med. 2002 Jul-Aug;64(4):604-11.

Fatigue and proinflammatory cytokine activity in breast cancer survivors.

Bower JE(1), Ganz PA, Aziz N, Fahey JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Prevention and Control Research, Jonsson Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles 90095-6900, USA.
jbower@ucla.edu

OBJECTIVE: Fatigue is a common problem among cancer patients and survivors, yet
the mechanisms underlying the occurrence and persistence of this symptom are not 
known. Activation of the immune system may evoke feelings of fatigue, which are
mediated by proinflammatory cytokines. We examined whether fatigued breast cancer
survivors would show elevations in proinflammatory cytokines and markers of
cytokine activity compared with nonfatigued survivors. Differences in lymphocyte 
subsets, cortisol, and behavioral symptoms associated with proinflammatory
cytokines were also assessed.
METHODS: Forty breast cancer survivors (20 fatigued, 20 nonfatigued) provided
blood samples at visits scheduled to control for diurnal variability. Cytokines, 
soluble markers of cytokine activity, and cortisol were measured by immunoassay
and lymphocyte subsets by flow cytometry. Participants also completed
questionnaires measuring demographic, medical, and behavioral variables.
RESULTS: Fatigued breast cancer survivors had significantly higher serum levels
of several markers associated with proinflammatory cytokine activity than
nonfatigued survivors, including interleukin-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra),
soluble tumor necrosis factor receptor type II (sTNF-RII), and neopterin. They
were also more likely to report behavioral problems that co-occur with fatigue in
the context of immune activation. Fatigued survivors had significantly lower
serum levels of cortisol than the nonfatigued group as well as differences in two
lymphocyte populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Fatigued breast cancer survivors showed elevations in serum markers 
associated with proinflammatory cytokine activity an average of 5 years after
diagnosis. Results suggest mechanisms through which enduring immune activation
may occur, including alterations in cortisol and in lymphocyte subsets.

PMID: 12140350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Jun;966:400-8.

Psychoneuroimmunology: new avenues of research for the twenty-first century.

Prolo P(1), Chiappelli F, Fiorucci A, Dovio A, Sartori ML, Angeli A.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA School of Dentistry, and Dental Research Institute, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Psychoneuroimmunology (PNI) investigates the relations between the
psychophysiological and immunophysiological dimensions of living beings. PNI
brings together researchers in a number of scientific and medical disciplines,
including psychology, the neurosciences, immunology, physiology, pharmacology,
psychiatry, behavioral medicine, infectious diseases, and rheumatology. All are
scientists with profound interest in interactions between the nervous and immune 
systems, and the relation between behavior and health. Despite the variety in
domains and approaches to research, the outcome common to all research endeavors 
is the discovery of new information, of uncovered facts, of novel evidence, which
contributes to the continuing generation of knowledge. In this paper we discuss
psychoneuroimmune aspects of some conditions that are not routinely immediately
associated with immunity, such as the condition of being the caregiver of
somebody suffering from dementia; the effect on the brain-body modulations of
aluminum, a metal that is not a component of the human body; and insomnia, a
fairly common but disturbing disease, that even today lacks an effectual
treatment.

PMID: 12114297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Metabolism. 2002 Jul;51(7):887-92.

Chronic insomnia is associated with a shift of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis
factor secretion from nighttime to daytime.

Vgontzas AN(1), Zoumakis M, Papanicolaou DA, Bixler EO, Prolo P, Lin HM,
Vela-Bueno A, Kales A, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, and Health
Evaluation Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Chronic insomnia, by far the most commonly encountered sleep disorder in medical 
practice, is characterized by difficulty falling or staying asleep at night and
increased fatigue during the day. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF) are fatigue-inducing cytokines, and the daytime secretion of IL-6 is
negatively influenced by the quantity and quality of the previous night's sleep. 
We hypothesize that the poor quality of insomniacs' sleep is associated with a
hypersecretion of these 2 cytokines during the daytime, which, in turn,
correlates with the fatigue experienced by these patients. Eleven young
insomniacs (6 men and 5 women) and 11 (8 men and 3 women) age- and body mass
index (BMI)-matched healthy controls participated in the study. Subjects were
recorded in the sleep laboratory for 4 consecutive nights and serial 24-hour
plasma measures of IL-6 and TNF were obtained during the 4th day. Insomniacs
compared to controls slept poorly (sleep latency and wake were increased, whereas
percentage sleep time was decreased during baseline nights, all P <.05). The mean
24-hour IL-6 and TNF secretions were not different between insomniacs and
controls. However, the difference in the change (increase) of IL-6 plasma levels 
from midafternoon (2 PM) to evening (9 PM) between insomniacs and controls was
significant (P <.01). Furthermore, cosinor analysis showed a significant shift of
the major peak of IL-6 secretion from nighttime (4 AM) to evening (7 PM) in
insomniacs compared to controls (P <.05). Also, while TNF secretion in controls
showed a distinct circadian rhythm with a peak close and prior to the offset of
sleep (P <.05), such a rhythm was not present in insomniacs. Finally, daytime
secretion of TNF in insomniacs was characterized by a regular rhythm of 4 hours
(P <.05); such a distinct periodicity was not present in controls. We conclude
that chronic insomnia is associated with a shift of IL-6 and TNF secretion from
nighttime to daytime, which may explain the daytime fatigue and performance
decrements associated with this disorder. The daytime shift of IL-6 and TNF
secretion, combined with a 24-hour hypersecretion of cortisol, an arousal
hormone, may explain the insomniacs' daytime fatigue and difficulty falling
asleep.

Copyright 2002, Elsevier Science (USA). All rights reserved.

PMID: 12077736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Eur J Clin Invest. 2002 May;32(5):304-8.

Morning cortisol production in coronary heart disease patients.

Fantidis P(1), Perez De Prada T, Fernandez-Ortiz A, Carcia-Touchard A, Alfonso F,
Sabaté M, Hernández R, Escaned J, Bauelos C, Macaya C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Prof Martín Lagos s/n, Madrid, Spain.
pfantidis@hcsc.insalud.es

BACKGROUND: The circadian cycle of the endogenous anti-inflammatory system (EAIS)
is characterized by a morning increase in cortisol production. Circulating
interleukin-6 (IL-6) activates the EAIS. A circadian variation in the onset of
myocardial infarction, sudden death, stable angina (SA) and unstable angina (UA) 
has been reported. The aim of this study was to determine morning cortisol
production in coronary heart disease (CHD) patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Serum cortisol and IL-6 were measured in 129 patients with
either SA (n = 65) or UA (n = 64) and 40 healthy volunteers. Blood samples were
taken between 9 : 00 h and 12 : 00 h. The upper normal range of cortisol (25
microg dL-1) was used as a reference to classify patients.
RESULTS: Forty-eight patients had elevated cortisol levels (ECL) (32.5 +/- 5.4
microg dL-1), while 81 patients had normal cortisol levels (NCL) (15.7 +/- 5.9
microg dL-1). In NCL patients, IL-6 levels (26.6 pg mL-1, ranged from 0.2 to
183.7) were significantly higher (P < 0.004) than in ECL patients (9.70 pg mL-1, 
range 0.07-56.5). Forty-eight patients with UA belonged to the NCL group of
patients, while only 16 UA patients belonged to the ECL group (chi(2) = 0.000).
Thirty-two patients with SA belonged to the ECL group, and 33 to the NCL group
(chi(2) = 0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with 'inappropriately' normal morning cortisol production
had high IL-6 levels. 'Inappropriately' normal cortisol, detected in 75% of UA
and 50% of SA patients, may be insufficient for limiting inflammation. These
findings have novel clinical implications and suggest new therapeutic approaches 
in the treatment of these patients.

PMID: 12027868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Mol Neurosci. 2002 Feb-Apr;18(1-2):105-9.

The human PER1 gene is inducible by interleukin-6.

Motzkus D(1), Albrecht U, Maronde E.

Author information: 
(1)IPF PharmaCeuticals GmbH, Hannover, Germany.

The mammalian period (Per) genes which are components of the circadian clock are 
mainly regulated via an autoregulatory feedback loop. Here we show that a human
PER1 (hPER1) reporter gene activity is stimulated by interleukin-6 (IL-6), a
member of the large cytokine gene family and an inducer of the acute phase
reaction, in human hepatoma (HuH-7) cells. Our results confirm and extend the
view that the hPER1 promoter acts as a sensor for multiple signaling molecules
thereby integrating different physiological parameters.

PMID: 11931340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Gravit Space Biol Bull. 2001 Jun;14(2):7-14.

Consequences of contamination of the spacecraft environment: immunologic
consequences.

Shearer WT(1).

Collaborators: Shearer WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. wshearer@bcm.tmc.edc

Long-term space voyages pose numerous known and unknown health hazards, to the
human immune system. Well-studied clinical examples of secondary
immunodeficiencies created on Earth, lead one to predict that the conditions of
prolonged space flight would weaken the human immune responses that normally hold
infection and cancer in check. From evidence gathered from humans flown for
prolonged periods in space and from human models of space flight studied on Earth
it is reasonable to suspect that space travelers to the planet Mars would
experience a weakening of immunity. Subtle defects of immune cell structure and
function have been observed in astronauts, such as weakening of specific
T-lymphocyte recall of specific antigens. Ground-based models also have
demonstrated alterations of immune function, such as the elevation of
neuroendocrine immune system messengers, interleukin-6, and soluble tumor
necrosis factor-alpha receptor in sleep deprivation. Since severe immune
compromise the clinical consequences of reactivation of latent virus infections
and the development of cancer, has yet to be seen in space flight or in the Earth
models, it is extremely important to begin to quantify early changes in immunity 
to predict the development of immune system collapse with poor clinical outcomes.
This approach is designed to validate a number of surrogate markers that will
predict trouble ahead. Inherent in this research is the development of
countermeasures to reduce the risks of infection and cancer in the first humans
going to Mars.

PMID: 11865871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2001 Dec;62(6):542-8.

[Hormonal perturbations in fibromyalgia].

[Article in French]

Schlienger JL(1), Perrin AE, Grunenberger F, Goichot B.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Médecine Interne et de Nutrition, Hôpital de Hautepierre, 67098
Strasbourg Cedex, France.

Fibromyalgia is a syndrome characterized by chronic musculoskeletal pain and
fatigue without biological detectable disturbances. The mechanisms of this
disease are unknown. It has been postulated that it can be the consequence of a
chronic stress mediated mainly through the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis and
the sympathetic nervous system. These fields have been extensively studied.
Results were scattered and non convincing. A reduction of growth hormone and
IGF-1 levels described in a third of patients has led to a double blind random
clinical trial with biogenetic growth hormone. Results were equivocal . Other
hormonal systems are grossly normals and circadian rhythms are unaltered. Despite
some arguments in favour of a CRH neurons hyperactivity, these results are not
able to consolide a particular physiopathological mechanism and to argument for a
new therapeutic approach. Many of the abnormalities may be the consequence of
psychological disturbances.

PMID: 11845032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Neuropsychobiology. 2002;45(1):1-6.

Activation of the inflammatory response system in autism.

Croonenberghs J(1), Bosmans E, Deboutte D, Kenis G, Maes M.

Author information: 
(1)University Center of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND/AIM: There is now some evidence that autism may be accompanied by
abnormalities in the inflammatory response system (IRS). Products of the IRS,
such as proinflammatory cytokines, may induce some of the behavioral symptoms of 
autism, such as social withdrawal, resistance to novelty and sleep disturbances. 
The main aim of the present study was to examine whether autism is accompanied by
an activation of the IRS.
METHODS: We measured the production of interleukin (IL)-6, IL-10, the IL-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1RA), interferon (IFN)-gamma and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha by whole blood and the serum concentrations of IL-6, the IL-2
receptor (IL-2R) and IL-1RA.
RESULTS: This study showed a significantly increased production of IFN-gamma and 
IL-1RA and a trend toward a significantly increased production of IL-6 and
TNF-alpha by whole blood of autistic children. There were no significant
differences in the serum concentrations of IL-6, IL-2R and IL-1RA between
autistic and normal children.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that autism may be accompanied by an
activation of the monocytic (increased IL-1RA) and Th-1-like (increased
IFN-gamma) arm of the IRS. It is hypothesized that increased production of
proinflammatory cytokines could play a role in the pathophysiology of autism.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11803234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Exp Gerontol. 2002 Jan-Mar;37(2-3):349-57.

MtmRNA gene expression, via IL-6 and glucocorticoids, as potential genetic marker
of immunosenescence: lessons from very old mice and humans.

Mocchegiani E(1), Giacconi R, Cipriano C, Muzzioli M, Gasparini N, Moresi R,
Stecconi R, Suzuki H, Cavalieri E, Mariani E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Section of Nutrition, Immunity and Ageing, Immunology
Center, INRCA, Via Birarelli 8, 60121 Ancona, Italy. e.mocchegiani@inrca.it

Metallothioneins (MTs) are involved in metal-related cell homeostasis because of 
their high affinity for metals forming clusters. The main functional role of MTs 
is to sequester and/or dispense zinc participating in zinc homeostasis, which is 
relevant in normal immune response. Consistent with this role, MTs gene
expression (MTmRNA) is transcriptionally induced by a variety of stressing agents
to protect cells from reactive oxygen species. In order to accomplish this task, 
MTs gene expression is affected by glucocorticoids and IL-6 for a prompt immune
response. This protection is peculiar in young-adult age during transient stress 
and inflammatory condition, but not in ageing because stress-like condition and
inflammation are constant for the whole circadian cycle. This may lead MTs to
turn-off from role of protection in young age to deleterious one in ageing. The
aim is to suggest MTmRNA as potential genetic marker of immunosenescence. Liver
MTmRNA, IL-6 and glucocorticoids levels are high, whereas the bioavailability of 
zinc ions is low and natural killer cells activity is depressed in old and very
old mice during the light period as compared to young in the same period. An
inversion of nutritional-endocrine-immune profile exclusively occurs in young
mice during the night showing the existence of immune plasticity. No inversion
occurs in old mice during the night. As a consequence, no immune plasticity in
old mice ensues. By contrast, very old mice remodel the altered MTmRNA and
immune-endocrine profile during the night up to values of young ones observed
during the light period. Therefore, the remodelling of MTmRNA may be involved in 
the maintenance of immune plasticity with subsequent successful ageing. Thus,
MTmRNA, via IL-6 and glucocorticoids, may be potential genetic marker of
immunosenescence. This assumption is reinforced by low MTmRNA in lymphocytes of
nonagenarians and young-adult people in comparison with elderly and Down's
syndrome subjects.

PMID: 11772522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Cardiol. 2001 Dec;81(2-3):243-9.

Blunted sympathetic response in diabetic patients with decompensated congestive
heart failure.

Burger AJ(1), Aronson D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, West Campus Noninvasive Cardiology Laboratory, Baker-3 1 Deaconess Road, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA. aburger@caregroup.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The risk for congestive heart failure is strongly increased in
diabetes, and the prognosis of diabetic patients with established heart failure
is worse compared to nondiabetic patients. Heart failure entails complex
alterations in autonomic and neurohormonal responses, which exert a direct
deleterious effect on the heart and contribute to progressive circulatory
failure. Altered neurohumoral physiology may underlie the poor prognosis of
diabetic patients with heart failure.
METHODS: We studied 88 patients (mean age 61+/-13 years) admitted for
decompensated heart failure. Neurohormonal and cytokine profiles, including
plasma renin activity, aldosterone, norepinephrine, endothelin-1, tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha, and interleukin-6, were obtained in all patients. In addition, a
24-h Holter recording was performed, and time and frequency domain heart rate
variability indices were calculated.
RESULTS: Of 88 patients, 48 were classified as having diabetes based on history, 
diet therapy, or use of oral hypoglycemic agents or insulin. The only difference 
in the neurohormonal and cytokine profile between the diabetic and nondiabetic
groups was a significantly lower norepinephrine level in diabetic patients
(668+/-64 vs. 489+/-50 pg/ml, P=0.009). Heart rate variability analysis revealed 
that the low-frequency power in normalized units (an index of sympathetic
modulation) was significantly lower in diabetic patients (4.7+/-1.4 vs.
5.9+/-0.9, P=0.04). No significant differences occurred in any of the time (the
percentage of RR intervals with >50 ms variation and the square root of mean
squared differences of successive RR intervals) or frequency domain (high
frequency power) indices of parasympathetic modulation between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with diabetes mellitus exhibit a blunted sympathetic
response during heart failure decompensation. Blunted sympathetic activation in
the setting of symptomatic heart failure may impair the ability of the myocardium
to compensate and contribute to the high incidence of symptomatic heart failure
among diabetic patients.

PMID: 11744142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Eur Heart J. 2002 Jan;23(1):70-8.

Do cytokines enable risk stratification to be improved in NYHA functional class
III patients? Comparison with other potential predictors of prognosis.

Kell R(1), Haunstetter A, Dengler TJ, Zugck C, Kübler W, Haass M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2002 Jan;23(1):9-10.

AIMS: Elevated plasma levels of proinflammatory cytokines have been reported in
patients with congestive heart failure. The purpose of this study was to assess
whether cytokines improve risk stratification in a homogeneous group of NYHA
class III patients with a left ventricular ejection fraction <40%.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma concentrations of big endothelin, tumour necrosis
factor alpha, interleukins -1, -6, -10 and -12, sCD14 and GM-CSF were measured by
ELISA in 91 NYHA III patients [mean (SD) age: 55 (10) years, 69% male, 34%
coronary artery disease, 66% dilated cardiomyopathy] with a left ventricular
ejection fraction and a peak oxygen uptake (peak VO2) of 19 (9)% and 12.1 (3.6)
ml x min(-1) x kg(-1), respectively. During follow-up [22 (13) months], 31
patients (34%) died due to cardiovascular causes. In non-survivors, interleukin-6
was twice as high as in survivors [12.8 (16.9) pg x ml(-1)vs 5.6(5.3) pg x
ml(-1), P<0.003], whereas plasma concentrations of the other cytokines showed no 
significant differences. Concerning long-term survival (> or =1 year),
multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed an independent prognostic power for
interleukin-6, which was further improved by combining with left ventricular
ejection fraction and peak VO2, while for short-term survival (up to 6 months)
interleukin-6 did not allow risk stratification.
CONCLUSION: In NYHA class III patients, plasma concentrations of interleukin-6
are predictive of long-term survival. However, its value may be limited for
clinical decision-making for cardiac transplantation (short-term survival).

Copyright 2001 The European Society of Cardiology.

PMID: 11741364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Br J Cancer. 2001 Sep 28;85(7):953-8.

The treatment of advanced renal cell cancer with high-dose oral thalidomide.

Stebbing J(1), Benson C, Eisen T, Pyle L, Smalley K, Bridle H, Mak I, Sapunar F, 
Ahern R, Gore ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW3 6JJ,
UK.

Thalidomide is reported to suppress levels of several cytokines, angiogenic and
growth factors including TNF-alpha, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF),
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). The resulting
anti-angiogenic, immunomodulatory and growth suppressive effects form the
rationale for investigating thalidomide in the treatment of malignancies. We have
evaluated the use of high-dose oral thalidomide (600 mg daily) in patients with
renal carcinoma. 25 patients (all men; median age, 51 years; range 34-76 years)
with advanced measurable renal carcinoma, who had either progressed on or were
not suitable for immunotherapy, received thalidomide in an escalating schedule up
to a maximum dose of 600 mg daily. Treatment continued until disease progression 
or unacceptable toxicity were encountered. 22 patients were assessable for
response. 2 patients showed partial responses (9%; 95% CI: 1-29), 7 (32%; 95% CI:
14-55) had stable disease for more than 6 months and a further 5 (23%; 95% CI:
8-45) had stable disease for between 3 and 6 months. We also measured levels of
TNF-alpha, bFGF, VEGF, IL-6 and IL-12 before and during treatment. In patients
with SD > or = 3 months or an objective response, a statistically significant
decrease in serum TNF-alpha levels was demonstrated (P = 0.05). The commonest
toxicities were lethargy (> or = grade II, 10 patients), constipation (> or =
grade II, 11 patients) and neuropathy (> or = grade II, 5 patients). Toxicities
were of sufficient clinical significance for use of a lower and well tolerated
dose of 400 mg in currently accruing studies.

Copyright 2001 Cancer Research Campaign

PMCID: PMC2375104
PMID: 11592764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Psychosom Med. 2001 Jul-Aug;63(4):568-78.

Effects of sleep on endotoxin-induced host responses in healthy men.

Haack M(1), Schuld A, Kraus T, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether increased sleep during viral or bacterial
infections supports host defense mechanisms.
METHODS: To test this assumption in humans, healthy male subjects were assigned
either to sleep from 2300 to 0700 hours (n = 10) or to stay awake through the
night (n = 10). In the sleeping subjects Salmonella abortus equi endotoxin (0.4
ng/kg) or placebo were intravenously injected in balanced order during the first 
SWS episode. The age-matched, sleep-deprived subjects were injected at the same
time point.
RESULTS: As expected, endotoxin significantly increased rectal temperature, the
plasma levels of cortisol, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), the soluble
TNF receptors p55 and p75, Interleukin (IL)-6, the IL-1 receptor antagonist (RA),
leukocyte, and granulocyte counts in both sleeping and sleep-deprived subjects,
whereas lymphocyte and monocyte counts were transiently reduced. Time courses of 
endotoxin-induced host responses did not differ between the sleep and sleep
deprivation groups. Endotoxin did not affect the amount of nocturnal wakefulness,
nonrapid-eye-movement (NREM) sleep, or rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep across the 
total night compared with placebo, but significantly increased
electroencephalogram-arousals (EEG-arousals) in stage 2 and decreased arousals in
SWS. In addition, the amount of SWS, spectral EEG-delta and -theta power was
increased at the beginning and at the end of the sleep period, respectively, when
the degree of immune activation was relatively low.
CONCLUSION: The present results support the notion that short-term sleep
deprivation is unlikely to harm the immune system as far as unspecific acute
responses are concerned. The effects of endotoxin on sleep in this case support
prior observations that in humans, enhanced SWS and intensified NREM sleep occur 
when host defense activation is subtle.

PMID: 11485110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Affect Disord. 2001 May;64(2-3):185-93.

Effects of symptomatic severity on elevation of plasma soluble interleukin-2
receptor in bipolar mania.

Tsai SY(1), Yang YY, Kuo CJ, Chen CC, Leu SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Medical College and Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Circulating soluble interleukin-2 receptors (sIL-2Rs) and soluble
interleukin-6 receptors (sIL-6Rs) are stable immune measures. Elevated plasma
sIL-2R levels are present in patients with schizophrenia, major depression, and
bipolar mania, but not with minor psychiatric disorders. The increased plasma
sIL-2R levels are state-dependent in bipolar mania. However, altered production
of plasma sIL-6R and the effects of clinical characteristics on plasma sIL-6R and
sIL-2R levels in bipolar disorder remains uncertain.
METHODS: Plasma sIL-2R and sIL-6R levels were measured in 31 Taiwanese bipolar
manic (DSM-IV) patients with Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS) scores of > or =26
as well as during the subsequent remission (YMRS< or =12), and equal numbers of
age- and gender-matched healthy controls. The relationships of clinical variables
such as age, age of onset, smoking, medication status, coexisting psychotic
features, number of prior episodes, duration of illness, presence of depression
before or following the manic episode, and manic severity to plasma sIL-2R and
sIL-6R levels in acute mania along with remission were examined.
RESULTS: Plasma sIL-2R but not sIL-6R levels were significantly higher in acute
mania than in subsequent remission (P<0.05) and controls (P<0.0005). In acute
mania, the plasma sIL-2R levels were significantly correlated to YMRS scores
(r=0.34, P<0.05). The remaining clinical variables had no effect on plasma sIL-2R
and sIL-6R levels in acute mania or remission. There was a significantly positive
relationship between the reduction of plasma sIL-2R levels from the acute to
follow-up measurements (DeltasIL-2R) and symptomatic improvement of acute mania
(DeltaYMRS) (r=0.61, P<0.001).
LIMITATIONS: Our sample included medicated and unmedicated patients in acute
mania. The psychotropic medication may have divergent effects on the plasma
sIL-2R levels in acute mania and subsequent remission.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevation of plasma sIL-2R but not sIL-6R levels in bipolar mania
supports the idea that the immunomodulatory mechanism may vary in different
psychotic disorders. In contrast to being a trait marker in schizophrenia and
depressive disorder, plasma sIL-2R levels may be considered a biological
indicator of manic severity in a group of bipolar affective patients.

PMID: 11313085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2001 May;90(5):1736-43.

Simulated microgravity, psychic stress, and immune cells in men: observations
during 120-day 6 degrees HDT.

Choukèr A(1), Thiel M, Baranov V, Meshkov D, Kotov A, Peter K, Messmer K, Christ 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic of Anaesthesiology, University of Munich, 81366 Munich, Germany.

Because 6 degrees head-down tilt (HDT) is an established method to mimic low
gravity on earth, the aim of the present study was to determine the effects of
120-day HDT on psychic stress and peripheral blood immune cells in six healthy
male volunteers. Psychological state was assessed by a current stress test, and
cortisol was measured in saliva. During HDT, all volunteers developed psychic
stress, and the diurnal rhythm of cortisol secretion was significantly altered.
In addition, urine excretion of dopamine and norepinephrine increased. The innate
part of the immune response was activated, as evidenced by the increase in the
expression of beta(2)-integrins on polymorphonuclear leukocytes and a rise in the
number of circulating natural killer (NK) cell lymphocytes. The ratio of T-helper
to T-cytotoxic and T-suppressor cells decreased, whereas no changes in T and B
lymphocytes were observed. Plasma levels of interleukin-6 increased significantly
and returned to basal levels after the end of the HDT period. Thus 6 degrees HDT 
appears to be a valid model to induce psychic stress and neuroendocrine-related
changes in the immune system, changes that might also be encountered by
astronauts and cosmonauts during long-duration spaceflights.

PMID: 11299263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Clin Chem. 2001 Mar;47(3):426-30.

Absence of diurnal variation of C-reactive protein concentrations in healthy
human subjects.

Meier-Ewert HK(1), Ridker PM, Rifai N, Price N, Dinges DF, Mullington JM.

Collaborators: Dinges DF(1), Mullington JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Lahey Clinic Medical Center, 41 Mall Rd.,
Burlington, MA 01805, USA. hans.k.meirewert@lahey.org

BACKGROUND: The concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) in otherwise healthy
subjects has been shown to predict future risk of myocardial infarction and
stroke. CRP is synthesized by the liver in response to interleukin-6, the serum
concentration of which is subject to diurnal variation.
METHODS: To examine the existence of a time-of-day effect for baseline CRP
values, we determined CRP concentrations in hourly blood samples drawn from
healthy subjects (10 males, 3 females; age range, 21-35 years) during a baseline 
day in a controlled environment (8 h of nighttime sleep).
RESULTS: Overall CRP concentrations were low, with only three subjects having CRP
concentrations >2 mg/L. Comparison of raw data showed stability of CRP
concentrations throughout the 24 h studied. When compared with cutoff values of
CRP quintile derived from population-based studies, misclassification of greater 
than one quintile did not occur as a result of diurnal variation in any of the
subjects studied. Nonparametric ANOVA comparing different time points showed no
significant differences for both raw and z-transformed data. Analysis for
rhythmic diurnal variation using a method fitting a cosine curve to the group
data was negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that baseline CRP concentrations are not subject to
time-of-day variation and thus help to explain why CRP concentrations are a
better predictor of vascular risk than interleukin-6. Determination of CRP for
cardiovascular risk prediction may be performed without concern for diurnal
variation.

PMID: 11238292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Obes Res. 2000 Dec;8(9):673-5.

Raised interleukin-6 levels in obese patients.

Roytblat L(1), Rachinsky M, Fisher A, Greemberg L, Shapira Y, Douvdevani A,
Gelman S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anesthesiology, Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of
the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. l.roytblat@iname.com

OBJECTIVE: Obese patients demonstrate a variety of biochemical, metabolic, and
pulmonary abnormalities. Inflammatory mediators such as tumor necrosis
factor-alpha and interleukin-6 (IL-6) may have a direct effect on glucose and
lipid metabolism. Hypoxemia in itself induces release of IL-6. The aim of this
study was to examine the relationship between IL-6 levels in healthy volunteers
(control group) and three different groups of obese patients: patients without
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS), patients with OSAS, and patients with
obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) (daytime baseline oxygen saturation of
<93%).
RESEARCH METHODS AND PROCEDURES: We measured serum IL-6 levels in 25 obese
patients (body mass index of >35 kg/m2) and 12 healthy women.
RESULTS: The results demonstrate statistically significant differences in serum
IL-6 levels between the control group (1.28 +/- 0.85 pg/mL) and obese patients
without OSAS (7.69 +/- 5.06 pg/mL, p < 0.05) and with OSAS (5.58 +/- 0.37 pg/mL, 
p < 0.0005). In the patients with OHS, IL-6 concentrations were highest (43.13
+/- 24.27 pg/mL).
DISCUSSION: We conclude that serum IL-6 is increased in obese patients. The
highest IL-6 levels were found in the patients with OHS.

PMID: 11225716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Tongji Med Univ. 2000;20(3):200-2.

The change of interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor in patients with
obstructive sleep apnea syndrome.

Liu H(1), Liu J, Xiong S, Shen G, Zhang Z, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical University,
Wuhan 430030.

The levels of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) expression in culture of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC) and the plasma levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha in the
patients with obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS) were measured and the
relationship between OSAS and IL-6 or TNF-alpha expression studied. Both IL-6 and
TNF-alpha were detected by using ELISA in 22 patients with OSAS and 16 normal
controls. The levels of LPS-induced IL-6 (787.82 +/- 151.97 pg/ml) and TNF-alpha 
(4165.45 +/- 1501.43 pg/ml) expression in the supernatant of the culture of PBMC 
and plasma level of IL-6 (50.67 +/- 4.70 pg/ml) and TNF-alpha (299.09 +/- 43.57
pg/ml) in the patients with OSAS were significantly higher than those in the
normal controls (in the supernatant of the culture of PBMC: 562.69 +/- 197.54
pg/ml and 1596.25 +/- 403.08 pg/ml respectively; in the plasma; 12.69 +/- 2.75
pg/ml and 101.88 +/- 21.27 pg/ml respectively). There were significantly positive
correlation between the levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha and the percentage of time
of apnea and hyponea, as well as the percentage of time spending at SaO2 below
90% in the total sleep time. It was concluded that LPS-induced IL-6 and TNF-alpha
levels as well as plasma IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels in the patients with OSAS were
up-regulated, which may be associated with the pathogenesis of OSAS.

PMID: 11215046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Circulation. 2001 Feb 13;103(6):806-12.

Diurnal variation in endothelium-dependent vasodilatation is not apparent in
coronary artery disease.

Shaw JA(1), Chin-Dusting JP, Kingwell BA, Dart AM.

Author information: 
(1)Alfred and Baker Medical Unit, Alfred Hospital and Baker Medical Research
Institute, Prahran, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Acute coronary syndromes present with an increased incidence from
6:00 AM to 12:00 noon. Whether endothelial function follows a diurnal rhythm and 
whether this rhythm is impaired in coronary artery disease (CAD) has not
previously been studied.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Diurnal variation in endothelium-dependent vasodilatation
was examined in 10 CAD patients and 10 control subjects. Forearm blood flow
responses to acetylcholine, sodium nitroprusside, and N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine 
were determined by plethysmography at 8:00 AM, 2:00 PM, and 8:00 PM. Heart rate, 
blood pressure, plasma cortisol, and inflammatory markers were also determined.
Heart rate and the low-frequency component of heart rate variability were
greatest in the morning in control subjects, suggesting a diurnal variation in
sympathetic activity. Basal forearm blood flows were significantly reduced in
control subjects at 8:00 PM compared with 8:00 AM and 2:00 PM (1.2+/-0.2 versus
2.1+/-0.2 [8:00 AM] and 2.1+/-0.3 [2:00 PM] mL. 100 mL(-1). min(-1); P<0.05) but 
unchanged in the CAD group. Acetylcholine (37 microgram/min) responses were
greater at 8:00 AM than at 8:00 PM in control subjects (12.5+/-3.7 versus
19.6+/-2.9 mL. 100 mL(-1). min(-1), respectively; P<0.05), but these responses
were not time dependent in the CAD group. Responses to sodium nitroprusside were 
similar at all time points and between those with and without CAD.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, normal volunteers have a diurnal variation in their
endothelium-dependent vasodilatation that may counteract other, potentially
adverse, diurnal variations in hemodynamic and other parameters. In contrast, CAD
patients who had presented with acute coronary syndromes showed a loss of this
protective mechanism.

PMID: 11171787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Z Rheumatol. 2000;59 Suppl 2:II/75-9.

Relationship between interleukin-6 (IL-6) and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
hormones in rheumatoid arthritis.

Mastorakos G, Ilias I.

Systemic symptoms in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are mediated, at least in part, by
elevated levels of circulating interleukin 6 (IL-6), which is a potent activator 
of the human hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis. In a recent study, we
observed that the 24 h time-integrated plasma ACTH and cortisol, as well as
urinary free cortisol levels of untreated RA patients were not significantly
different from control subjects, in spite of their active disease. However, an
earlier morning surge of plasma ACTH and cortisol in RA patients was found.
Plasma ACTH and cortisol responses to oCRH were similar between RA patients and
controls. Plasma IL-6 levels showed a pronounced circadian variation and were
significantly increased in the RA patients, compared to control subjects. In the 
RA patients, we detected a positive temporal correlation between plasma levels of
IL-6 and ACTH/cortisol, with IL-6 preceding ACTH and cortisol by 1 and 2 h,
respectively. In the same patients, we detected a negative effect of cortisol
upon IL-6 exerted with a delay of 5 h. In patients with early untreated
RA--although endogenous IL-6 stimulates the ACTH and cortisol secretion--the
overall secretory activity of the HPA axis remains "inappropriately" normal
despite elevated plasma IL-6 levels. The resulting "inappropriately" normal
cortisol levels are apparently insufficient to satisfactorily limit the
inflammation in these patients. In patients with Sjögren's syndrome the ACTH and 
cortisol response after CRH stimulation has been found to be blunted. On the
other hand, patients suffering from systemic lupus erythematosus, when subjected 
to insulin tolerance testing, showed a lower cortisol response compared to
healthy controls. These data indicate a direct and/or indirect involvement of a
defective HPA axis in the pathogenesis of certain autoimmune-related pathologic
entities.

PMID: 11155809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Z Rheumatol. 2000;59 Suppl 2:II/62-4.

Correlation of IL-6 with the classical humoral disease activity parameters ESR
and CRP and with serum cortisol, reflecting the activity of the HPA axis in
active rheumatoid arthritis.

Boss B(1), Neeck G.

Author information: 
(1)Kerckhoff Clinic and Foundation, Department of Rheumatology, Ludwigstr. 37-39,
61231 Bad Nauheim, Germany.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease with elevated levels
of proinflammatory cytokines in peripheral blood, especially IL-6, but also IL-1 
alpha and TNF alpha, for example, in different concentrations, depending on
disease activity. A disturbed circadian rhythm of cortisol secretion and an
overall elevated cortisol release in active RA, depending on disease activity, is
known. The presented study examined correlations of IL-6 as the most important
systemic mediator of the acute phase response in active RA with classical humoral
disease activity parameters, such as erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and
C-reactive protein (CRP), and with serum cortisol. We investigated 64 active RA
patients, previously untreated with glucocorticoids. IL-6 was measured by ELISA
from Pharmingen (San Diego), ESR by the method of Westergren and CRP by
nephelometry (Behring Marburg, Germany). Cortisol was measured in 34 of these
patients, using a fluorescence-polarization immunoassay (FPIA) from Abbott. We
found correlations of IL-6 with CRP (p < 0.001, Spearman Rank Test, rs = 0.75),
with ESR (p < 0.001, rs = 0.62) and with serum cortisol (p = 0.019, rs = 0.401). 
ESR and CRP correlate (p < 0.001, rs = 0.8) and cortisol also correlates with ESR
(p = 0.002, rs = 0.52) and CRP (p < 0.001, rs = 0.57). IL-6 as an important
systemic mediator of inflammation in RA correlates closely with CRP, as it
induces its production, and with ESR. These three parameters correlate well with 
serum cortisol, which is increased in active RA, depending on disease activity.
Thus, IL-6 is an important disease activity parameter in RA that is closely
related to both the classical humoral disease activity and the HPA axis.

PMID: 11155806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Jan;107(1):165-70.

Soluble TNF-alpha receptor 1 and IL-6 plasma levels in humans subjected to the
sleep deprivation model of spaceflight.

Shearer WT(1), Reuben JM, Mullington JM, Price NJ, Lee BN, Smith EO, Szuba MP,
Van Dongen HP, Dinges DF.

Collaborators: Shearer WT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2001 Jan;107(1):19-20.

BACKGROUND: The extent to which sleep loss may predispose astronauts to a state
of altered immunity during extended space travel prompts evaluation with
ground-based models.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to measure plasma levels of selected cytokines and their
receptors, including the putative sleep-regulation proteins soluble TNF-alpha
receptor (sTNF-alpha R) I and IL-6, in human subjects undergoing 2 types of sleep
deprivation during environmental confinement with performance demands.
METHODS: Healthy adult men (n = 42) were randomized to schedules that varied in
severity of sleep loss: 4 days (88 hours) of partial sleep deprivation (PSD)
involving two 2-hour naps per day or 4 days of total sleep deprivation (TSD).
Plasma samples were obtained every 6 hours across 5 days and analyzed by using
enzyme-linked immunoassays for sTNF-alpha RI, sTNF-alpha RII, IL-6, soluble IL-2 
receptor, IL-10, and TNF-alpha.
RESULTS: Interactions between the effects of time and sleep deprivation level
were detected for sTNF-alpha RI and IL-6 but not for sTNF-alpha RII, soluble IL-2
receptor, IL-10, and TNF-alpha. Relative to the PSD condition, subjects in the
TSD condition had elevated plasma levels of sTNF-alpha RI on day 2 (P =.04), day 
3 (P =.01), and across days 2 to 4 of sleep loss (P =.01) and elevated levels of 
IL-6 on day 4 (P =.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Total sleep loss produced significant increases in plasma levels of 
sTNF-alpha RI and IL-6, messengers that connect the nervous, endocrine, and
immune systems. These changes appeared to reflect elevations of the homeostatic
drive for sleep because they occurred in TSD but not PSD, suggesting that naps
may serve as the basis for a countermeasures approach to prolonged spaceflight.

PMID: 11150007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Oct;85(10):3597-603.

Effects of sleep and sleep deprivation on interleukin-6, growth hormone,
cortisol, and melatonin levels in humans.

Redwine L(1), Hauger RL, Gillin JC, Irwin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California and San Diego Veterans
Healthcare System, 92161, USA.

The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of nocturnal sleep,
partial night sleep deprivation, and sleep stages on circulating concentrations
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) in relation to the secretory profiles of GH, cortisol,
and melatonin. In 31 healthy male volunteers, blood samples were obtained every
30 min during 2 nights: uninterrupted, baseline sleep and partial sleep
deprivation-early night (awake until 0300 h). Sleep was measured by
electroencephalogram polysomnography. Sleep onset was associated with an increase
in serum levels of IL-6 (P < 0.05) during baseline sleep. During PSD-E, the
nocturnal increase in IL-6 was delayed until sleep at 0300 h. Sleep stage
analyses indicated that the nocturnal increase in IL-6 occurred in association
with stage 1-2 sleep and rapid eye movement sleep, but levels during slow wave
sleep were not different from those while awake. The profile of GH across the 2
nights was similar to that of IL-6, whereas the circadian-driven hormones
cortisol and melatonin showed no concordance with sleep. Loss of sleep may serve 
to decrease nocturnal IL-6 levels, with effects on the integrity of immune system
functioning. Alternatively, given the association between sleep stages and IL-6
levels, depressed or aged populations who show increased amounts of REM sleep and
a relative loss of slow wave sleep may have elevated nocturnal concentrations of 
IL-6 with implications for inflammatory disease risk.

PMID: 11061508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;85(9):3169-76.

Abnormal cytokine and adrenocortical hormone regulation in myotonic dystrophy.

Johansson A(1), Carlström K, Ahrén B, Cederquist K, Krylborg E, Forsberg H,
Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Umeå University Hospital, Sweden.
asa.johansson@medicin.umu.se

Metabolic-endocrine dysfunctions, including hyperinsulinemia,
hypertriglyceridemia, increased fat mass, and dysregulation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, are common in myotonic dystrophy (MD). We
hypothesized that increased production of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) may be important underlying mechanisms. We studied the
diurnal rhythmicity of cytokines and cortisol, ACTH, and dehydroepiandrosterone
in 18 men with adult onset MD and 18 controls. Morning levels of androstenedione,
17-hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, and insulin were also determined. Genetic
analyses were performed, including calculation of allele sizes. Median
circulating 24-h levels of IL-6 (P < 0.001), TNF-alpha (P = 0.05), ACTH (P <
0.05), and cortisol (P < 0.05) were all significantly increased in MD, whereas
dehydroepiandrosterone levels were decreased (P < 0.001). The diurnal rhythms of 
these cytokines/ hormones were disturbed in patients. Morning testosterone levels
were decreased and insulin levels increased (P < 0.01 for both). Patients with
high body fat mass had significantly increased insulin levels and decreased
morning levels of cortisol, ACTH, and testosterone. IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels are
increased and adrenocortical hormone regulation is disturbed in MD. Adiposity may
contribute to these disturbances, which may be of importance for decreased
adrenal androgen hormone production and metabolic, muscular, and neuropsychiatric
dysfunction in MD.

PMID: 10999804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Proc Nutr Soc. 2000 Aug;59(3):359-71.

Role of adipose tissue in body-weight regulation: mechanisms regulating leptin
production and energy balance.

Havel PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis 95616, USA.
pjhavel@ucdavis.edu

Adipose tissue performs complex metabolic and endocrine functions. Among the
endocrine products produced by adipose tissue are tumour necrosis factor alpha,
interleukin 6, acylation-stimulating protein and leptin. The present review will 
focus primarily on mechanisms regulating leptin production and leptin action, and
the implications of this regulation in the control of energy balance. Leptin acts
in the central nervous system where it interacts with a number of hypothalamic
neuropeptide systems to regulate feeding behaviour and energy expenditure. The
presence of extreme obesity in animals and human subjects with mutations of the
leptin gene or the leptin receptor demonstrates that normal leptin production and
action are critical for maintaining energy balance. Insulin is the major
regulator of leptin production by adipose tissue. Insulin infusions increase
circulating leptin concentrations in human subjects. Plasma leptin levels are
markedly decreased in insulin-deficient diabetic rodents, and the low leptin
levels contribute to diabetic hyperphagia. Based on in vitro studies, the effect 
of insulin to stimulate leptin production appears to involve increased glucose
metabolism. Blockade of glucose transport or glycolysis inhibits leptin
expression and secretion in isolated adipocytes. Evidence suggests that anaerobic
metabolism of glucose to lactate does not stimulate leptin production.
Alterations in insulin-mediated glucose metabolism in adipose tissue are likely
to mediate the effects of energy restriction to decrease, and refeeding to
increase, circulating leptin levels. Changes in glucose metabolism may also
explain the observation that high-fat meals lower 24h circulating leptin levels
relative to high-carbohydrate meals in human subjects, suggesting a mechanism
that may contribute to the effects that high-fat diets have in promoting
increased energy intake, weight gain and obesity. The decreased circulating
leptin observed during energy restriction is related to increased sensations of
hunger in human subjects. Thus, decreases in leptin during energy-restricted
weight-loss regimens may contribute to the strong propensity for weight regain. A
better understanding of the precise mechanisms regulating leptin production and
leptin action may lead to new approaches for managing obesity.

PMID: 10997652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Am J Gastroenterol. 2000 Jun;95(6):1539-44.

Nitric oxide may contribute to nocturnal hemodynamic changes in cirrhotic
patients.

Genesca J(1), Segura R, Gonzalez A, Catalan R, Marti R, Torregrosa M, Cereto F,
Martinez M, Esteban R, Guardia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital General Universitari Vall d'Hebron, 
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with liver cirrhosis have a nocturnal worsening of
hemodynamic parameters that has been associated with an increased risk of
variceal bleeding at nighttime. The aim of this study was to investigate whether 
nitric oxide and cytokines are implicated in these hemodynamic changes.
METHODS: Ten cirrhotic patients and eight controls were studied. Mean blood
pressure, heart rate, plasma norepinephrine, tumor necrosis factor alpha and
interleukin-6 levels, and serum nitrite + nitrate levels were determined at 0800,
1600, and 2400 h. All determinations were performed in supine rest and at least 4
h after meals. In a second study, nitrite + nitrate levels were assessed in 10
cirrhotic patients before and after eating a standard meal.
RESULTS: Mean arterial pressure levels that were always lower in the patient
group showed a nocturnal decrease in both groups of subjects. Heart rate values
that were always higher in cirrhotic patients showed a nocturnal fall in
controls, whereas cirrhotics maintained elevated values at nighttime.
Norepinephrine levels were higher in cirrhotics and maintained similar values
during the study, whereas controls had a significant nocturnal decrease. Nitrite 
+ nitrate levels that were higher in cirrhotic patients showed a significant mean
increase of 40% from morning (0800 h) to night (2400 h) in the patient group,
whereas in controls no change was observed (p < 0.05). Tumor necrosis factor
alpha and interleukin-6 levels did not change either in patients or controls
during the entire period. Cirrhotic patients with or without ascites maintained a
pattern of hemodynamic and biochemical changes similar to the pattern observed in
the entire group of patients. Finally, no changes in serum nitrite + nitrate
levels were observed in patients before and after eating the standard meal.
CONCLUSION: An increased nocturnal nitric oxide production might contribute to
the hemodynamic changes observed in cirrhotic patients during nighttime.

PMID: 10894593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cytokine. 2000 May;12(5):518-21.

Interferon-alpha acutely impairs sleep in healthy humans.

Späth-Schwalbe E(1), Lange T, Perras B, Fehm HL, Born J.

Author information: 
(1)Charité, Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany.

We investigated the effects of two low doses of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) on
nocturnal sleep in 18 healthy men by means of polysomnographic sleep recordings. 
At 1900h, human recombinant IFN-alpha (1000 or 10000 U/kg body weight) or placebo
was administered subcutaneously. Between 2300h and 0700h subjects were allowed to
sleep. In general effects were stronger at the dose of 10000 than 1000 U/kg body 
weight of IFN-alpha. Although, after IFN-alpha subjects experienced increased
fatigue, the cytokine impaired the quality of nocturnal sleep. The higher dose of
IFN-alpha suppressed slow wave sleep (17.8 +/- 2.0% vs 25.2 +/- 2.6% following
placebo, P<0.003) but increased time spent in shallow sleep (P<0.05) during the
first half of sleep time. Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep latency was postponed
(P<0.02) and time spent in REM sleep was significantly decreased after IFN-alpha 
(P<0.04). The impairing influence of IFN-alpha on sleep in humans is in contrast 
with findings of sleep promoting effects of this cytokine in animals. Our data
suggest that endogenous IFN-alpha may be a factor responsible for alterations of 
sleep, e.g. in the course of viral infections.

PMID: 10857770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cytokine. 2000 Jun;12(6):694-8.

Effects of an intravenous catheter on the local production of cytokines and
soluble cytokine receptors in healthy men.

Haack M(1), Reichenberg A, Kraus T, Schuld A, Yirmiya R, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

Like many aspects of physiology, functions of the immune system show considerable
diurnal variation. Studies investigating diurnal variations in the circulating
amounts of cytokines, in general, used blood samples obtained from an intravenous
catheter. The results of such studies may be confounded by an effect of the
catheter on local cytokine production. We measured the levels of IL-6, tumour
necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and soluble TNF receptors (sTNF-R) p55 and p75 
in 20 healthy men between 09:00 and 19:00 h in plasma samples obtained from an
intravenous catheter and in one additional sample obtained by a simple needle
stick in the contralateral arm 10 h after baseline. In plasma from the catheter
the levels of IL-6 increased significantly over time, TNF-alpha levels slightly
decreased and the time courses of TNF receptor levels showed significant trends
of a higher order. Control levels of IL-6, TNF-alpha and sTNF-R p75 measured in
plasma obtained by needle stick after 10 h did not differ from baseline, and
those of sTNF-R p55 were even higher. We conclude that local alterations in the
production of cytokines and soluble cytokine receptors induced by an intravenous 
catheter represent an important confounding factor for studies investigating
diurnal variations in immune functions.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10843747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. JAMA. 2000 May 3;283(17):2235; author reply 2236.

Chronic systemic inflammation in overweight and obese adults.

Vgontzas AN, Bixler EO, Papanicolaou DA, Chrousos GP.

Comment on
    JAMA. 1999 Dec 8;282(22):2131-5.

PMID: 10807374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2000 Apr;278(4):R947-55.

Dose-dependent effects of endotoxin on human sleep.

Mullington J(1), Korth C, Hermann DM, Orth A, Galanos C, Holsboer F, Pollmächer
T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Institute, Munich, Germany.
mullingt@caregroup.harvard.edu

The role of the central nervous system in the host response to infection and
inflammation and modulation of these responses by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal system are well established. In animals,
activation of host defense mechanisms increases non-rapid eye movement (NREM)
sleep amount and intensity, which, in turn, are thought to support host defense, 
or the body's ability to defend itself against challenges to its immune system.
In humans, the evidence is conflicting. Therefore, we investigated the effects of
three placebo-controlled doses of endotoxin on host response, including nocturnal
sleep in healthy volunteers. Administered before nocturnal sleep onset, endotoxin
dose dependently increased rectal temperature, heart rate, and the plasma levels 
of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha, soluble TNF receptors, interleukin (IL)-1
receptor antagonist, IL-6, and cortisol. The lowest dose reliably increased
circulating levels of cytokines and soluble cytokine receptors, but it did not
affect rectal temperature, heart rate, or cortisol. This subtle host defense
activation increased deep NREM sleep amount, often referred to as slow-wave sleep
(stages 3 and 4), and intensity (delta power). Conversely, the highest dose of
endotoxin disrupted sleep. Whereas it is well established that the endocrine and 
thermoregulatory systems are very sensitive to endotoxin, this study shows that
human sleep-wake behavior is even more sensitive to activation of host defense
mechanisms.

PMID: 10749783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Clin Appl Thromb Hemost. 1999 Jan;5(1):37-42.

Circadian interrelationships among levels of plasma fibrinogen, blood platelets, 
and serum interleukin-6.

Kanabrocki EL(1), Sothern RB, Messmore HL, Roitman-Johnson B, McCormick JB,
Dawson S, Bremner FW, Third JL, Nemchausky BA, Shirazi P, Scheving LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs Hospital, Hines,
Illinois 60141, USA.

Circadian (24 h) rhythms of fibrinogen, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and platelet levels
were studied in 11 males ages 46 to 72 years. Since there is a known circadian
rhythm for fibrinogen and IL-6, we postulated that the peak level (acrophase) of 
fibrinogen would follow the acrophase of IL-6, based on the fact that IL-6 is the
stimulus for fibrinogen production in the liver. Platelet levels were measured to
show whether there was any correlation with the IL-6 acrophase because it has
been reported that IL-6 affects megakaryocytes and platelets in dogs. We found
that the acrophase for IL-6 occurred at 02:03 h and the acrophase for fibrinogen 
occurred at 09:16 h. Platelet counts peaked at 16:56 h. Thus, there was a
positive correlation between IL-6 and fibrinogen acrophases and a negative
correlation of each with the acrophase for platelets. The positive linkage of
IL-6 with fibrinogen in this study suggests that suppression of IL-6 production
would lower those peak fibrinogen levels that occur in the morning in association
with arterial ischemic events. This could result in fewer arterial ischemic
events, especially in the morning.

PMID: 10725981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Mar;85(3):1151-8.

Sleep apnea and daytime sleepiness and fatigue: relation to visceral obesity,
insulin resistance, and hypercytokinemia.

Vgontzas AN(1), Papanicolaou DA, Bixler EO, Hopper K, Lotsikas A, Lin HM, Kales
A, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania
State University, Hershey 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Mar;85(3):1331-3.

Sleep apnea and associated daytime sleepiness and fatigue are common
manifestations of mainly obese middle-aged men. The onset of sleep apnea peaks in
middle age, and its morbid and mortal sequelae include complications from
accidents and cardiovascular events. The pathophysiology of sleep apnea remains
obscure. The purpose of this study was to test three separate, albeit closely
related, hypotheses. 1) Does sleep apnea contribute to the previously reported
changes of plasma cytokine (tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6) and
leptin levels independently of obesity? 2) Among obese patients, is it
generalized or visceral obesity that predisposes to sleep apnea? 3) Is apnea a
factor independent from obesity in the development of insulin resistance? Obese
middle-aged men with sleep apnea were first compared with nonapneic age- and body
mass index (BMI)-matched obese and age-matched lean men. All subjects were
monitored in the sleep laboratory for 4 consecutive nights. We obtained
simultaneous indexes of sleep, sleep stages, and sleep apnea, including
apnea/hypopnea index and percent minimum oxygen saturation. The sleep apneic men 
had higher plasma concentrations of the adipose tissue-derived hormone, leptin,
and of the inflammatory, fatigue-causing, and insulin resistance-producing
cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 than nonapneic obese men,
who had intermediate values, or lean men, who had the lowest values. Because
these findings suggested that sleep apneics might have a higher degree of insulin
resistance than the BMI-matched controls, we studied groups of sleep-apneic obese
and age- and BMI-matched nonapneic controls in whom we obtained computed
tomographic scan measures of total, sc, and visceral abdominal fat, and
additional biochemical indexes of insulin resistance, including fasting plasma
glucose and insulin. The sleep apnea patients had a significantly greater amount 
of visceral fat compared to obese controls (<0.05) and indexes of sleep
disordered breathing were positively correlated with visceral fat, but not with
BMI or total or sc fat. Furthermore, the biochemical data confirmed a higher
degree of insulin resistance in the group of apneics than in BMI-matched
nonapneic controls. We conclude that there is a strong independent association
among sleep apnea, visceral obesity, insulin resistance and hypercytokinemia,
which may contribute to the pathological manifestations and somatic sequelae of
this condition.

PMID: 10720054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Exp Eye Res. 2000 Mar;70(3):255-9.

Contact lens wear alters the production of certain inflammatory mediators in
tears.

Thakur A(1), Willcox MD.

Author information: 
(1)Co-operative Research Centre for Eye Research and Technology, The University
of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia. a.thakur@cclru.unsw.edu.au

Contact lens wear has been associated with an increased risk of corneal infection
and/or inflammation. We studied the hypothesis that contact lens wear alters the 
number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) on the cornea during sleep and the 
levels of inflammatory mediators in the tear film. Three groups of subjects were 
analysed: a non-contact lens wearing group (NCLW), non-adapted (neophyte) contact
lens wearers (NACLW) who wore lenses during sleep for the first time in this
study and adapted contact lens wearers (ACLW) who normally wore lenses on a daily
wear schedule. Ocular PMNs were collected by a non-contact irrigation technique
and their numbers counted after staining. Tears were collected from each group
and analysed using ELISAs for the presence of the PMN chemoattractants IL-8 and
LTB(4)and the cytokines IL-1beta, IL-6 and GM-CSF. Corneal irrigation data
demonstrated significantly higher numbers of PMNs from NACLW (P<0.05) compared to
the other groups. ACLW showed significantly fewer PMNs (P =0.03) compared to NCLW
group. The NACLW group had significantly lower concentrations (P<0. 05) of IL-8, 
LTB(4)and IL-6 in their tears after 8 hr of sleep compared to the other groups.
The ACLW group had significantly (P<0. 05) higher levels of IL-8 at most time
points compared to the other two groups. The levels of the chemoattractants IL-8 
and LTB(4)in tears were inversely related to the numbers of PMNs from the corneal
surface and the chemotaxis of PMNs in vitro. During one night sleep in contact
lenses the numbers of PMNs and the concentration of certain inflammatory
mediators are significantly altered compared to no lens wear. However, this
alteration changes from NACLW to ACLW. This may have effects on the ability of
the eye to defend itself during contact lens wear.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10712811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Intern Med. 2000 Feb;247(2):179-87.

Cortisol axis abnormalities early after stroke--relationships to cytokines and
leptin.

Johansson A(1), Ahrén B, Näsman B, Carlström K, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Umeâ University Hospital, Umeâ, Sweden.
Asa.Johansson@medicin.umu.se

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationships between circulating levels of
proinflammatory cytokines and adrenocortical hormones and leptin early after
stroke.
DESIGN: Blood samples were collected four times daily the first two days after
stroke, twice daily the next 4 days and four times at day 7. Cognitive function
and functional outcome was measured at admittance and at day 7.
SETTING: Consecutive inclusion of patients admitted to the stroke unit at Umeâ
University Hospital.
SUBJECTS: Eight men and 4 women with acute stroke and 10 healthy volunteers.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels and diurnal variations of plasma proinflammatory
cytokines interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha),
serum adrenocortical hormones (cortisol and DHEA) and leptin, and MMSE, SSS, and 
ADL scores.
RESULTS: A significant correlation was present between IL-6 and cortisol levels
the first two days after stroke (P < 0.05). In patients with a disturbed diurnal 
rhythm of cortisol, cortisol and leptin levels were increased (68% and 81%
increase, respectively), whilst DHEA levels were unaltered. Half of the patients 
displayed an abnormal diurnal rhythmicity of leptin at the end of the week.
Median TNF-alpha levels for the first two days after stroke also correlated to
median leptin levels at the end of the week (P < 0.05). Median IL-6 levels
correlated to severity of paresis on days 1 and 7 and to MMSE scores on day 7 (P 
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Neuroendocrine disturbances are common and often profound early
after stroke. Cytokines seem to be important modulators of these disturbances,
including diurnal rhythmicity of cortisol and leptin.

PMID: 10692080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Aug;84(8):2603-7.

Circadian interleukin-6 secretion and quantity and depth of sleep.

Vgontzas AN(1), Papanicolaou DA, Bixler EO, Lotsikas A, Zachman K, Kales A, Prolo
P, Wong ML, Licinio J, Gold PW, Hermida RC, Mastorakos G, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Sleep Research and Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania
State University, Hershey 17033, USA. axv3@psu.edu

Patients with pathologically increased daytime sleepiness and fatigue have
elevated levels of circulating interleukin-6 (IL-6). The latter is an
inflammatory cytokine, which causes sickness manifestations, including somnolence
and fatigue, and activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. In this
study, we examined: 1) the relation between serial measurements of plasma IL-6
and quantity and depth of sleep, evaluated by polysomnography; and 2) the effects
of sleep deprivation on the nyctohemeral pattern of IL-6 secretion. Eight healthy
young male volunteers were sampled for 24 h twice, at the baseline state, after a
normal night's sleep and after total overnight sleep deprivation. At the baseline
state, IL-6 was secreted in a biphasic circadian pattern with two nadirs at 0800 
and 2100 and two zeniths at 1900 and 0500 (P < 0.01). The baseline amount of
sleep correlated negatively with the overall daytime secretion of the cytokine (P
< 0.05). Also, depth of sleep at baseline correlated negatively with the
postdeprivation increase of daytime secretion of IL-6 (P < 0.05). Sleep
deprivation changed the temporal pattern of circadian IL-6 secretion but not the 
overall amount. Indeed, during the post-deprivation period, the mean daytime
(0800-2200 h) levels of IL-6 were significantly higher (P < 0.05), whereas the
nighttime (2200-0600 h) levels were lower than the predeprivation values. Thus,
sleep-deprived subjects had daytime oversecretion and nighttime under-secretion
of IL-6; the former might be responsible for their daylong somnolence and
fatigue, the latter for the better quality (depth) of their sleep. These data
suggest that a good night's sleep is associated with decreased daytime secretion 
of IL-6 and a good sense of well-being and that good sleep is associated with
decreased exposure of tissues to the proinflammatory and potentially detrimental 
actions of IL-6. Sleep deprivation increases daytime IL-6 and causes somnolence
and fatigue during the next day, whereas postdeprivation decreases nighttime IL-6
and is associated with deeper sleep.

PMID: 10443646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 1999 Aug 1;25(1-2):207-19.

Pyrogenic toxins of Staphylococcus aureus in sudden unexpected nocturnal deaths
in adults and older children: factors influencing the control of inflammatory
responses to toxic shock syndrome toxins.

Al Madani O(1), Gordon AE, Weir DM, Raza MW, Busuttil A, Blackwell C.

Author information: 
(1)Forensic Medicine Unit, University of Edinburgh, UK.

Sudden unexpected nocturnal deaths (SUND) occur in young immigrant workers,
mainly from south-east Asia, who are employed in countries such as Singapore and 
Saudi Arabia. Pyrogenic toxins of Staphylococcus aureus have been identified in
two cases of sudden unexpected death in adults in the UK and it has been
suggested that these or other toxins with superantigen properties might induce
strong inflammatory responses leading to sudden unexpected nocturnal deaths. The 
objectives of the present study were (1) to assess the levels of antibodies to
pyrogenic staphylococcal toxins in the general population, (2) to assess the
levels of IgG to the toxins needed to reduce the production of inflammatory
mediators by 50% in a model system, (3) to assess in a model system the effects
on inflammatory responses to toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST) of cortisol
levels present at night, during the day and under conditions of physiological
stress. Enzyme linked immunosorbent assays were used to assess levels of IgG to
TSST, staphylococcal enterotoxin A (SEA) and staphylococcal enterotoxin C (SEC). 
Human buffy coats were used to examine the effect of IgG to the toxins for
neutralising activity and the effect of cortisol on induction of inflammatory
mediators. Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) was detected by a bioassay
with L929 cells, interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-10 (IL-10) were measured by
an enzyme linked immunosorbent assay. IL-6 and TNF-alpha levels elicited by the
toxins were not reduced by night time levels of cortisol (5-10 microg dl(-1))
levels. Day time levels of cortisol (10-20 microg dl(-1)) significantly inhibited
IL-6 production but not TNF-alpha in responses. Stress levels of cortisol (40 80 
microg dl(-1)) significantly reduced all three cytokines earlier than the normal 
day time levels. The majority of the population tested had sufficient antibodies 
to reduce TNF-alpha and IL-6 responses elicited by TSST and SEC in the model
system. In the age range in which most sudden unexpected nocturnal death cases
occur (20-39 years), males had significantly lower levels of IgG to TSST compared
with females. If these toxins play a role in precipitating the series of events
leading to sudden unexpected nocturnal death, the higher levels of IgG to the
toxins observed in females might explain partly the much higher prevalence of
these deaths among men in this age range. If inflammatory responses play a role
in sudden unexpected nocturnal death, the inability of the night time levels of
cortisol to control IL-6 and TNF-alpha in the model system might reflect these
interactions in vivo. The methods developed for detection of the toxins in tissue
samples and the quantitative IgG assays for anti-toxins can be applied to
investigation of SUND victims to test the hypothesis that some of these deaths
are precipitated by pyrogenic staphylococcal toxins.

PMID: 10443510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 1999 Aug 1;25(1-2):199-206.

Cortisol levels and control of inflammatory responses to toxic shock syndrome
toxin-1 (TSST-1): the prevalence of night-time deaths in sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS).

Gordon AE(1), Al Madani O, Weir DM, Busuttil A, Blackwell C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
gordon@srv1.med.ed.ac.uk

There is evidence that inflammatory responses have been induced in the tissues
and body fluids of many SIDS infants. We suggested that some of these deaths are 
due to uncontrolled inflammatory responses to infectious agents and possibly
cigarette smoke. The majority of SIDS deaths occur during the 2-4 month age range
when infants have decreasing levels of maternal antibodies to infectious agents. 
Most deaths occur during the early hours of the morning. Adults are more
susceptible to inflammatory responses at night due to lower levels of cortisol
associated with circadian rhythm patterns. Infants develop these patterns between
the ages of 7 weeks and 4 months, at which time their night-time cortisol levels 
drop dramatically. The objective of this study was to use an in vitro model
system to assess the effects of different cortisol levels on proinflammatory
cytokine production in response to the staphylococcal toxic shock syndrome
toxin-1 (TSST-1) which has been identified in a significant number of SIDS
infants. Levels of cortisol present in infants at night and during the day before
and after the development of the circadian rhythm pattern were examined. Human
buffy coats (n = 9) were stimulated with TSST-1 and responses assessed over 72
hours by a bioassay for tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and an enzyme
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for interleukin-6 (IL-6). Cortisol levels
present in an infant at night after development of circadian rhythm (< or = 5
microg dl(-1)), did not significantly increase or decrease production of either
TNF-alpha or IL-6. Concentrations of cortisol greater than 5 microg dl(-1)
usually found in infants during the day or at night prior to the physiological
change significantly decreased production of TNF-alpha at 12 hours and of IL-6 at
12 and 16 hours. Only cortisol levels greater than 5 microg dl(-1) significantly 
decreased production of the pro-inflammatory cytokines by human buffy coats
stimulated with TSST-1. If the switch to the circadian rhythm pattern occurs in
an infant when maternal antibodies are still present or after they have developed
their own active immunity, the infant could neutralise common viruses, toxins or 
bacteria: however, if this switch occurs in an infant when antibody levels are
low, this could be a window of vulnerability during which infants are at an
increased risk of death if uncontrolled inflammatory responses are induced by
infectious agents or their products.

PMID: 10443509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Thromb Res. 1999 Jul 15;95(2):93-104.

The effect of short-term cold exposure on risk factors for cardiovascular
disease.

Mercer JB(1), Osterud B, Tveita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, Institute of Medical Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Tromsø, Norway. jamesm@fagmed.uit.no

The aim of this study was to see if a short-term period of exposure to cold in
young healthy subjects causes changes in hematological factors known to be
associated with the promotion of thrombogenesis. Over a period of 48 hours,
changes in the distribution of erythrocytes, granulocytes, and blood platelets,
as well as several coagulation, inflammatory, and fibrinolytic parameters, were
monitored in 11 young healthy male subjects following a short period (1 hour) of 
cold exposure (CE) (ambient temperature, 11 degrees C) or exposure to
thermoneutral conditions (ambient temperature, 26 degrees C) in winter
(November). The major findings were: (1) a CE-induced hemoconcentration as
indicated by an increase in erythrocyte count (3.2% increase); (2) after
appropriate adjustments for changes in hemoconcentration, a cold-induced
mobilization of granulocytes (14.5% increase) and a cold-induced decrease in
lymphocytes (7% decrease); (3) thromboxane B2 release following endotoxin
stimulation of whole blood was increased by 27.4% in the CE experiments; (4)
diurnal rhythms were observed in granulocytes, blood platelets, middle plate
volume, tissue plasminogen activator, and plasma activator inhibitor; and (5) CE 
caused no significant changes in lipopolysaccharide-induced tissue factor, nor in
the blood coagulation factor VII or cytokines, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis 
factor. It is concluded that short-term cold exposure in young healthy subjects
initiates a mild inflammatory reaction and a tendency for an increased state of
hypercoagulability.

PMID: 10418798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Immunol. 1999 Aug 1;163(3):1521-8.

Regulation of cytokines, cytokine inhibitors, and acute-phase proteins following 
anti-TNF-alpha therapy in rheumatoid arthritis.

Charles P(1), Elliott MJ, Davis D, Potter A, Kalden JR, Antoni C, Breedveld FC,
Smolen JS, Eberl G, deWoody K, Feldmann M, Maini RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Charing Cross Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Treatment with a chimeric mAb to TNF-alpha has been shown to suppress
inflammation and improve patient well-being in rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but the
mechanisms of action of such treatment have not been fully explored. Here we show
that in vivo administration of anti-TNF-alpha Ab, using a longitudinal analysis, 
results in the rapid down-regulation of a spectrum of cytokines, cytokine
inhibitors, and acute-phase proteins. Marked diurnal variation in the serum
levels of some of these were detected. These results were consistent with the
concept of a cytokine-dependent cytokine cascade, and the degree of clinical
benefit noted after anti-TNF-alpha therapy is probably due to the reduction in
many proinflammatory mediators apart from TNF-alpha, such as IL-6, which reached 
normal levels within 24 h. Serum levels of cytokine inhibitors such as soluble
p75 and p55 TNFR were reduced as was IL-1 receptor antagonist. Reductions in
acute-phase proteins occurred after serum IL-6 fell and included serum amyloid A,
haptoglobin, and fibrinogen. The latter reduction could be of importance, as it
is a risk factor for atherosclerosis, which is augmented in RA patients.

PMID: 10415055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999 Jun;33(7):1935-42.

Natural variability of circulating levels of cytokines and cytokine receptors in 
patients with heart failure: implications for clinical trials.

Dibbs Z(1), Thornby J, White BG, Mann DL.

Author information: 
(1)Winters Center for Heart Failure Research, Department of Medicine, Veterans
Administration Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to examine the variability in cytokines
and cytokine receptors in patients with heart failure in comparison with a group 
of healthy control subjects who were free of cardiovascular disease.
BACKGROUND: Despite increasing interest in cytokines as mediators of disease
progression in heart failure and the recent interest in suppressing cytokines in 
clinical studies, the extent of variability in cytokines and cytokine receptors
is largely unknown. This information is important for interpreting the results of
studies in which changes in cytokine levels are measured in response to a
specific form of therapy.
METHODS: Circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), and
soluble TNF receptors (types 1 and 2), as well as interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-6
receptor were measured on a daily, weekly and monthly basis in heart failure
patients (New York Heart Association class IIIa and IIIb; n = 10) and healthy
volunteer subjects (n = 10). Measurements of cytokines and cytokine receptors
were performed on plasma samples by enzyme-linked immunoassay. The daily, weekly 
and monthly degree of variability in cytokine and cytokine receptor levels was
assessed by determining the coefficient of variation each point in time.
RESULTS: The coefficient of variation for TNF-alpha and IL-6 levels increased
over time in patients with heart failure; moreover, the coefficient of variation 
in heart failure subjects was significantly greater for IL-6 than for TNF-alpha. 
The coefficient of variation in cytokine receptor levels was minimal, and did not
differ significantly between heart failure and control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with heart failure the degree of natural variability in 
circulating cytokine levels increases with time, and is greater for IL-6 than for
TNF-alpha. Accordingly, the results of the present study suggest that the sample 
size needed to show a statistically significant change in the circulating level
of a given cytokine will vary depending on the specific cytokine that is being
measured, as well as the time period over which that cytokine is being assayed.

PMID: 10362196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Thromb Haemost. 1999 Apr;81(4):571-5.

Circadian variations in natural coagulation inhibitors protein C, protein S and
antithrombin in healthy men: a possible association with interleukin-6.

Undar L(1), Ertuğrul C, Altunbaş H, Akça S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Akdeniz University School of Medicine,
Antalya, Turkey. undar@hipokrat.med.akdeniz.edu.tr

Recent observations describe an increase in platelet aggregability and a decrease
in fibrinolytic activity in the early morning hours. To determine whether
anticoagulant proteins also show such a circadian variation we measured protein C
(PC), protein S (PS), antithrombin (AT) and heparin cofactor-II (HC-II) levels on
venous plasma samples taken from 10 healthy men at three-hour intervals
throughout a 24-hour period. To investigate the possible temporal mapping of
circadian periodicity, we also measured plasma levels of beta-thromboglobulin
(beta-TG) as an indicator of platelet activation, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) as one
of the possible regulatory factors that drive this rhythm. Blood samples were
drawn at 6 a.m., 9 a.m., noon, 3 p.m., 6 p.m., 9 p.m. and midnight. PC, IL-6 and 
beta-TG were measured by ELISA, PS and AT by latex immune assay and HC-II by
chromogenic substrate method. A significant circadian variation was found in PC, 
PS, AT, beta-TG and IL-6, but not in HC-II levels. PC, PS, IL-6 and beta-TG were 
at their peaks at 6 a.m., and nadirs at a time from noon to midnight. AT peak was
at 6 p.m. and nadir at noon. The regression of PS on IL-6 was significant.
Although the fluctuations of PS and AT were within the normal ranges during the
day, some PC levels of two subjects were below the lower normal limit (0.70).
These data indicate that PC, PS, and AT show a marked circadian periodicity as
the other components of the blood coagulation and fibrinolytic system do. The
similar trends in plasma concentrations of PC, PS, beta-TG and IL-6 may be
coincidental, but could reflect a common regulatory mechanism or an effect on
each other. The clinical implications of these physiological changes in
coagulation inhibitors and the role of IL-6 in the anticoagulant response deserve
further studies.

PMID: 10235441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Horm Metab Res. 1998 Dec;30(12):726-9.

Leptin and interleukin-6 in sepsis.

Torpy DJ(1), Bornstein SR, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892-1862, USA.

Both leptin and interleukin-6 (IL-6) are hypersecreted in acute critical illness,
such as sepsis. Leptin is produced by adipocytes, it inhibits appetite and
stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, thereby reducing adipose mass. IL-6 is
produced by immune cells and adipocytes, it reduces the production of other
inflammatory cytokines and stimulates release of acute phase proteins by the
liver, participating in the control of inflammation. Leptin inhibits, whereas
IL-6 stimulates, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. While high IL-6 levels 
are associated with poor outcome in critically ill patients, the role of leptin
in critical illness and its importance for survival are not known. To examine the
relation between IL-6, leptin and cortisol in critical illness, we performed
frequent 4 h plasma sampling in eight patients on day 1 of intensive care unit
admission for acute sepsis. Sampling was repeated on days 3 and 5 in the five
survivors. The levels of all three hormones were markedly elevated; there was a
lack of the normal diurnal rhythmicity of leptin and IL-6 and a blunted diurnal
rhythmicity of cortisol secretion. A strong negative correlation between mean 24 
h plasma IL-6 and leptin was revealed. Although such a relationship could
possibly be explained by the negative and positive effects of cortisol
hypersecretion on each hormone respectively, a negative correlation between
leptin and cortisol was detected, whereas there was no significant correlation
between IL-6 and cortisol. Mean IL-6 values were higher (1389.5+/-644.9 vs.
658.8+/-250.5) and leptin levels were lower (2.73+/-1.1 vs. 26.5+/-11.6) in the
non-survivors than in the survivors. These findings suggest that IL-6 is not the 
principal stimulus of leptin hypersecretion in critically ill patients with
sepsis. The negative relation between IL-6 and leptin is of potential importance,
as high IL-6 levels have been associated with poor outcome in critically ill
patients, and relatively low leptin levels may impair sympathetic system and
immune functions.

PMID: 9930630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. QJM. 1998 Aug;91(8):549-60.

Cytokine dysregulation in the post-Q-fever fatigue syndrome.

Penttila IA(1), Harris RJ, Storm P, Haynes D, Worswick DA, Marmion BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Adelaide University, South Australia.

Comment in
    QJM. 1999 May;92(5):293-4.

The post-Q-fever fatigue syndrome (QFS) (inappropriate fatigue, myalgia and
arthralgia, night sweats, changes in mood and sleep patterns) follows about 20%
of laboratory-proven, acute primary Q-fever cases. Cytokine dysregulation
resulting from chronic immune stimulation and modulation by persistence of
Coxiella burnetii cells or their antigens is hypothesized. We studied cytokine
release patterns of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) stimulated with
various ligands in short-term culture, from 18 patients with active QFS, and 27
controls: six with resolving QFS, five who had had acute primary Q-fever without 
subsequent QFS, eight healthy Q-fever vaccinees and eight healthy subjects
without Q-fever antibody. Conditioned media (CM) from PBMC stimulated in
short-term culture with Q-fever antigens, PHA or measles antigen (as an unrelated
antigen) were assayed for IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10 and IFN gamma by AgEIA,
and for IL-1 and TNF alpha/beta by bioassay. Aberrant cytokine release patterns
were observed with PBMC from QFS patients when stimulated with Q-fever antigens: 
an accentuated release of IL-6 which was significantly [p = 0.01, non-parametric 
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)] in excess of medians for all four control
groups. With IL-2, the number of responders in the active QFS group was decreased
relative to control groups (Fisher's exact test, p = 0.01) whereas the number of 
IFN gamma responders was increased (Fisher's exact test, p = 0.0008). Significant
correlations were observed between concentrations of IL-6 in CM, total symptom
scores, and scores for other key symptoms.

PMID: 9893758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1998 Jul;23(5):427-37.

Endotoxin-induced changes in sleep and sleepiness during the day.

Hermann DM(1), Mullington J, Hinze-Selch D, Schreiber W, Galanos C, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

Sleepiness is a common symptom of infectious diseases. However, the peculiarities
and causes of impaired vigilance during host defense activation are largely
unknown. It has been shown earlier that mild host defense activation by endotoxin
does not affect daytime sleepiness and non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep in
humans. In the present study we investigated the effects of a more intensive
stimulation of the host defense by Salmonella abortus equi endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg),
administered 12 h following host response priming by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (300 micrograms s.c.), on daytime sleep and sleepiness 
in a placebo-controlled design in ten healthy men. Six equidistant
polysomnographically monitored naps were scheduled across the day and the time
course of subjective sleepiness was assessed. Endotoxin induced prominent
increases in rectal temperature, and in the plasma levels of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, interleukin-6, interleukin-1 receptor antagonist, and cortisol. In 
the first nap, 1 h following endotoxin administration, total sleep time and NREM 
sleep stage 2 were reduced, whereas wakefulness and sleep onset latency were
increased. Following this nap sleepiness transiently increased peaking prior to
the second nap. However, this nap and the following ones were not influenced by
endotoxin. These results suggest that prominent host defense activation reduces
daytime NREM sleep and increases sleepiness. One cause of daytime sleepiness
during infections may be prior sleep disruption and this kind of sleepiness may
not necessarily be associated with an increased sleep pressure.

PMID: 9802118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. QJM. 1998 Jul;91(7):489-92.

Circadian elevation of IL-6 levels in Muckle-Wells syndrome: a disorder of the
neuro-immune axis?

Gerbig AW(1), Dahinden CA, Mullis P, Hunziker T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Bern, Switzerland.

Muckle-Wells syndrome (MWS) is a rare autosomal dominant hereditary disorder
characterized by chronic recurrent urticaria, arthralgia, sensorineural deafness,
and in some cases nephropathy due to amyloidosis (AA type). We report a
21-year-old woman and her father, both suffering from this syndrome, in whom
elevated serum levels of IL-6 could be documented during the flares of urticaria,
and discuss the relevance of this finding for MWS.

PMID: 9797932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Nat Immun. 1998;16(1):1-5.

Circadian secretions of IL-2, IL-12, IL-6 and IL-10 in relation to the light/dark
rhythm of the pineal hormone melatonin in healthy humans.

Lissoni P(1), Rovelli F, Brivio F, Brivio O, Fumagalli L.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Radiation Oncology, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.

It has been demonstrated that cytokine activities are under neuroendocrine
control, recently mainly exerted by the pineal gland through the circadian
secretion of its main hormone melatonin (MLT). It is mainly released during the
night, but at present it is still unclear which relation exists between MLT and
the circadian secretion of cytokines. This study was performed to evaluate the
circadian secretion of IL-2, IL-6, IL-10 and IL-12 in relation to that of MLT.
The study included 10 healthy volunteers whose venous blood samples were
collected at 8 a.m., noon, 4 p.m., 8 p.m., 1 a.m. and 4 a.m. The mean levels of
MLT were significantly higher during the night than during the light phase of the
day. Similarly, IL-2 mean levels significantly increased during the night. IL-6
mean values were higher during the light period of the day without, however, any 
significant differences with respect to the nocturnal mean levels. Finally, no
substantial circadian variation was seen in IL-10 and IL-12 mean concentrations. 
These results show that IL-2 secretion increases during the night, concomitantly 
to that of the pineal hormone MLT, whereas there is no evidence of a circadian
secretion for the other cytokines. Since the pineal gland has been proven to
stimulate IL-2 endogenous production, the nocturnal increase in IL-2 blood
concentrations could depend at least in part on the promoting action of MLT,
whose release increases during the dark period of the day.

PMID: 9789119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Arch Intern Med. 1998 Sep 28;158(17):1870-81.

Concepts of fever.

Mackowiak PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Care Clinical Center, Maryland Veterans Affairs Health Care System,
Baltimore 21201, USA.

If asked to define fever, most physicians would offer a thermal definition, such 
as "fever is a temperature greater than...." In offering their definition, many
would ignore the importance of the anatomic site at which temperature
measurements are taken, as well as the diurnal oscillations that characterize
body temperature. If queried about the history of clinical thermometry, few
physicians could identify the source or explain the pertinacity of the belief
that 98.6 degrees F (37.0 degrees C) has special meaning vis-à-vis normal body
temperature. Fewer still could cite the origin of the thermometer or trace the
evolution of modern concepts of clinical thermometry. Although many would have
some knowledge of the fundamentals of thermoregulation and the role played by
exogenous and endogenous pyrogens in the induction of fever, few would have more 
than a superficial knowledge of the broad biological activities of pyrogenic
cytokines or know of the existence of an equally complex and important system of 
endogenous cryogens. A distinct minority would appreciate the obvious paradoxes
inherent in an enlarging body of data concerned with the question of fever's
adaptive value. The present review considers many of these issues in the light of
current data.

PMID: 9759682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Clin Chem Lab Med. 1998 May;36(5):323-5.

Short-term variability in the concentration of serum interleukin-6 and its
soluble receptor in subjectively healthy persons.

Dugué B(1), Leppänen E.

Author information: 
(1)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, Helsinki, Finland.

The effects of the time of the day and breakfast on the outcome of interleukin-6 
and its soluble receptor in serum were studied on 22 subjectively health
volunteers. We collected blood specimens at 8.00 a.m. after an overnight fast, at
9.30 a.m. after usual breakfast, and at 11.30 a.m. A second group of volunteers
(n = 20) was studied during the evening. We observed a significant decrease in
the concentration of interleukin-6 after breakfast. This suggests that for assay 
of this analyte it is preferable to collect specimens after overnight fast. No
changes were observed in the concentrations of interleukin-6 soluble receptor.
Weak, but significant negative correlations were found between the age of the
volunteers and the concentrations of interleukin-6 soluble receptor and between
age and the ratio interleukin-6 soluble receptor/interleukin-6. The
concentrations of interleukin-6 were positively and significantly correlated with
age. The within-subject variability was 30% for interleukin-6, 13% for its
receptor, and 33.1% for the ratio interleukin-6 soluble receptor/interleukin-6.
The between-subject variability was 43.7% for interleukin-6, 22.2% for its
receptor, and 60.2% for the ratio interleukin-6 soluble receptor/interleukin-6.
The indices of individuality (ratio within-subject variability/between-subject
variability) were calculated and found to be 0.69, 0.60, and 0.55 for
interleukin-6, its soluble receptor, and the ratio interleukin-6 soluble
receptor/interleukin-6, respectively. The implications of these indices with the 
use of health-related reference values is discussed.

PMID: 9676390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Affect Disord. 1998 Jun;49(3):211-9.

The inflammatory response system and the availability of plasma tryptophan in
patients with primary sleep disorders and major depression.

Song C(1), Lin A, Bonaccorso S, Heide C, Verkerk R, Kenis G, Bosmans E, Scharpe
S, Whelan A, Cosyns P, de Jongh R, Maes M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Research Center for Mental Health, University Department of
Psychiatry, Antwerp, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: It is now well established that major depression is accompanied by an
immune-inflammatory system response and that indicators of the latter are
inversely correlated with lower availability of plasma tryptophan in depression. 
Inflammation and infection can alter sleep architecture, whereas sleep
disturbances can impair immune functions.
AIMS AND METHODS: The aims of the present study were to examine: (i)
immune-inflammatory markers, i.e. serum interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-8, IL-6 receptor
(IL-6R), IL-1R antagonist (IL-1RA), gp130, and prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) production
by mitogen-stimulated whole blood and the availability of plasma tryptophan in
patients with primary sleep disorders, major depression and healthy volunteers;
and (ii) the relationships between the availability of tryptophan and indicators 
of the immune-inflammatory response system.
RESULTS: Mitogen-stimulated release of PGE2, and serum IL-6 and IL-8, were
significantly increased in both depressed and sleep disordered patients compared 
to normal controls. Serum IL-1RA was significantly higher in depressed patients
than in normal controls. Patients with depression and sleep disorders had a
significantly lower availability of tryptophan than normal controls. There were
significant and inverse relationships between the availability of plasma
tryptophan and serum IL-1RA, IL-6 and IL-8.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that (i) there is an activation of the
immune-inflammatory response system in primary sleep disorders and depression;
and (ii) the decreased availability of plasma tryptophan may be related to the
inflammatory system response.

PMID: 9629951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 May;83(5):1573-9.

Acute effects of recombinant human interleukin-6 on endocrine and central nervous
sleep functions in healthy men.

Späth-Schwalbe E(1), Hansen K, Schmidt F, Schrezenmeier H, Marshall L, Burger K, 
Fehm HL, Born J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Humboldt University, Charité, Germany.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a proinflammatory cytokine that has been shown to
mediate, in addition to immune reactions, various endocrine and central nervous
components of the acute phase response. In this context, the present study aimed 
to specify the contributions of IL-6 to the regulation of pituitary-adrenal
secretory activity and GH and TSH secretion, as well as to the regulation of
central nervous sleep and mood in healthy men. Effects of a low dose of IL-6 (0.5
microgram/kg body weight) were assessed, inducing plasma IL-6 concentrations
closely comparable with those typically observed after infectious challenge. Each
of the 16 male subjects participated in two 14-h sessions (between 1800 and 0800 
h), receiving either placebo or human recombinant IL-6 sc at 1900 h. Blood was
collected repeatedly to determine plasma hormone levels, serum concentrations of 
cytokines, and C-reactive protein. Moreover, mood was assessed, and sleep
recordings were obtained between 2300 and 0700 h. The cytokine induced a
prolonged increased in plasma concentrations of ACTH and cortisol (P < 0.001),
but led to a decrease in TSH concentrations (P < 0.01). In response to IL-6,
subjects reported fatigue and felt more inactive and less capable of
concentrating than after placebo. Sleep architecture was altered significantly by
the cytokine. Slow-wave sleep was decreased during the first half and increased
during the second half of sleep. Rapid eye movement sleep during the entire
nocturnal sleep time was significantly decreased. After IL-6, body temperature
rose slightly. C-reactive protein concentrations were dramatically increased 12.5
h after substance administration (P < 0.001). IL-6 did not affect serum
concentrations of IL-2, IL-8, interferon-alpha, and interferon-gamma. The results
underscore the importance of IL-6 in the cascade of cytokines for the
neuroendocrine response during the acute phase reaction. In addition, IL-6
appears to be involved in changes of sleep and behavior accompanying infection
and inflammatory disorders.

PMID: 9589658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Neurology. 1998 Apr;50(4):1149-52.

In vivo and in vitro immune variables in patients with narcolepsy and HLA-DR2
matched controls.

Hinze-Selch D(1), Wetter TC, Zhang Y, Lu HC, Albert ED, Mullington J, Wekerle H, 
Holsboer F, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Institute, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

We investigated cytokine levels (interleukin [IL]-1beta, IL-1ra, IL-2, IL-6,
tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alpha, TNF-beta) in plasma and secreted by
mitogen-stimulated blood monocytes and lymphocytes; T-cell subsets; and natural
killer cell activity in patients with narcolepsy and in human leukocyte antigen
(HLA)-DR2 matched controls. The only significant finding was higher IL-6
secretion by monocytes of patients than by those of the HLA-DR2-positive
controls. In conclusion, we found no major abnormalities of T-cell function in
patients with narcolepsy, but slight alterations of monocyte function deserving
further investigation.

PMID: 9566413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Clin Immunol. 1998 Jan;18(1):61-70.

The proinflammatory cytokines and arachidonic acid metabolites in human overnight
tears: homeostatic mechanisms.

Thakur A(1), Willcox MD, Stapleton F.

Author information: 
(1)Cooperative Research Centre for Eye Research and Technology, The University of
New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.

The tear film plays an important role in the defense of the external ocular
surface. During sleep a number of changes take place, including increased
production and release of various inflammatory mediators. We have studied the
hypothesis that closed-eye tears contain proinflammatory cytokines and lipid
inflammatory mediators, which serve to recruit polymorphonuclear leukocytes
(PMNs) and regulate the function of PMNs and IgA during sleep. We investigated
interleukin-1beta, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, monocyte chemotactic protein 1, 
granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), leukotriene B4 (LTB4),
and platelet activating factor (PAF) in open and closed-eye tears of normal
healthy subjects. Results showed that IL-6, IL-8, GM-CSF, LTB4, and PAF were
present in high levels in closed-eye tears compared to open-eye tears. Closed-eye
tears were able to recruit neutrophils, with maximal recruitment after 8 hr of
sleep, suggesting that chemokine IL-8 and the lipid chemoattractant LTB4 were
active. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that incubation of neutrophils with
closed-eye tears up-regulated the surface expression of IgA receptor, indicating 
that the GM-CSF in tears was functionally active. Up-regulation of cytokines and 
the lipid inflammatory mediator LTB4 during eye closure are noteworthy, as each
of these cytokines has an established role in initiation and amplification of the
inflammatory response. IL-8 and LTB4 may act as potent chemoattractants and
activators for PMNs, whereas IL-6 and GM-CSF potentiate the secretion and
function of IgA and enhance neutrophil responsiveness to proinflammatory
agonists.

PMID: 9475355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Jan;83(1):280-3.

Plasma leptin levels are increased in survivors of acute sepsis: associated loss 
of diurnal rhythm, in cortisol and leptin secretion.

Bornstein SR(1), Licinio J, Tauchnitz R, Engelmann L, Negrão AB, Gold P, Chrousos
GP.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Branch, NICHD, NIMH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Recent animal and human studies have suggested that leptin secretion is closely
linked to the functions of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the 
immune system, both of which are crucial in influencing the course and outcome of
critical illness. Therefore, we measured basal plasma leptin levels and examined 
the circadian secretion of leptin, in parallel with the hormones of the HPA axis 
and a key cytokine, interleukin-6, in critically ill patients with acute sepsis. 
Sixteen critically ill patients from the University of Leipzig Intensive Care
Unit were recruited for this study. All of these patients fulfilled the standard 
diagnostic criteria for sepsis. Plasma leptin levels were measured in all
patients and controls at 09:00. In addition, in a subgroup of eight critically
ill patients and all of the nine controls plasma leptin, cortisol, ACTH and
interleukin-6 concentrations were measured every 4 hours for 24 hours. Mean
plasma leptin levels were three-fold higher (18.9 +/- 4.5 ng/ml) in critically
ill patients than controls (3.8 +/- 1.0 ng/ml, p < 0.05). Similarly, ACTH levels 
were lower (7.8 +/- 3.4 pmol/l) in patients than in controls (17.1 +/- 1.5
pmol/l, p < .001), while plasma cortisol levels were increased (947.6 +/- 144
nmol/l) in patients compared to controls (361.1 +/- 29, p < 0.001). Morning
plasma interleukin-6 levels were markedly elevated in all patients with sepsis
(1238.0 +/- 543.1 pg/ml) versus controls (6.4 +/- 1.7, p < 0.001). The controls
exhibited a nyctohemeral fluctuation in plasma leptin levels with peak levels at 
23:00; in contrast, septic patients, had no nocturnal rise of leptin. In healthy 
controls, plasma leptin and cortisol had reciprocal circadian rhythms with high
nocturnal leptin levels and low nocturnal cortisol concentrations; in critically 
ill patients, this relation was abolished. Mean leptin levels were three-fold
higher in patients who survived the septic episode (25.5 +/- 6.2, n = 10) than in
non-survivors (8.0 +/- 3.7, n = 6, p < 0.01). We conclude that in addition to its
function as an anti-obesity factor, leptin may play a role in a severe stress
state such as acute sepsis.

PMID: 9435456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Jul;82(7):2182-91.

Exercise and circadian rhythm-induced variations in plasma cortisol
differentially regulate interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), IL-6, and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNF alpha) production in humans: high sensitivity of TNF alpha and 
resistance of IL-6.

DeRijk R(1), Michelson D, Karp B, Petrides J, Galliven E, Deuster P, Paciotti G, 
Gold PW, Sternberg EM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Neuroendocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
r.rijk@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl

Although we have previously shown that the integrity of inflammatory
mediator-induced activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is
essential for conferring resistance to inflammatory disease in susceptible Lewis 
rats, the role of endogenous glucocorticoid secretion in human immune function in
either health or disease is less clear. To further understand the relevance of
physiological variations in plasma cortisol on immune function in humans, we
evaluated ex vivo lipopolysaccharide-induced interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta),
IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha) production in the whole blood
of healthy volunteers studied under conditions chosen to approximate either
physiological or pharmacological glucocorticoid levels. Administration of a
pharmacological dose of hydrocortisone suppressed the production of all three
cytokines, whereas administration of a physiological dose of hydrocortisone
suppressed only TNF alpha production. Stress-induced levels of glucocorticoids,
achieved during exercise at 100% maximal oxygen utilization, suppressed IL-1 beta
and TNF alpha production, but were without effect on IL-6 production. In
addition, circadian variations of cortisol were associated with decreased TNF
alpha production, but were without effect on IL-1 beta or IL-6 production. These 
studies challenge the generally accepted idea that glucocorticoids consistently
suppress cytokine production and indicate a hierarchy of sensitivity, with TNF
alpha having the greatest sensitivity, IL-1 beta having intermediate sensitivity,
and IL-6 being resistant. The resistance of IL-6 production to glucocorticoid
suppression is compatible with data suggesting an antiinflammatory as well as a
proinflammatory action for this cytokine.

PMID: 9215292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 May;82(5):1313-6.

Elevation of plasma cytokines in disorders of excessive daytime sleepiness: role 
of sleep disturbance and obesity.

Vgontzas AN(1), Papanicolaou DA, Bixler EO, Kales A, Tyson K, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey 17033, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 May;82(5):1311-2.

Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and fatigue are frequent symptoms in the
general population and the chief complaint of the majority of patients at Sleep
Disorders Centers. There is evidence that the inflammatory cytokines tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF alpha), interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta), and IL-6 are
involved in physiological sleep regulation and that their administration to
humans is associated with sleepiness and fatigue. To explore whether plasma
levels of TNF alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-6 are elevated in patients with EDS, we
measured morning plasma levels of TNF alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-6 in 12 sleep
apneics, 11 narcoleptics, 8 idiopathic hypersomniacs, and 10 normal controls. TNF
alpha was significantly elevated in sleep apneics and narcoleptics compared to
that in normal controls (P < 0.001 and P = 0.001, respectively). Plasma IL-1beta 
concentrations were not different between sleep disorder patients and controls,
whereas IL-6 was markedly and significantly elevated in sleep apneics compared to
that in normal controls (P = 0.028). The primary factor influencing TNF alpha
values was the degree of nocturnal sleep disturbance, whereas the primary
determinant for IL-6 levels was the body mass index. Our findings suggest that
TNF alpha and IL-6 might play a significant role in mediating sleepiness and
fatigue in disorders of EDS in humans.

PMID: 9141509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1997 Apr;82(4):1279-83.

Circadian relationships between interleukin (IL)-6 and
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hormones: failure of IL-6 to cause sustained 
hypercortisolism in patients with early untreated rheumatoid arthritis.

Crofford LJ(1), Kalogeras KT, Mastorakos G, Magiakou MA, Wells J, Kanik KS, Gold 
PW, Chrousos GP, Wilder RL.

Author information: 
(1)Inflammatory Joint Diseases Section, National Institute of Arthritis and
Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

Systemic symptoms in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are mediated, at least in part, by
elevated levels of circulating interleukin (IL)-6, and this cytokine is also a
potent stimulus of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis. To evaluate the 24-h 
circadian secretory dynamics of ACTH, cortisol, and IL-6 and their interactions
in patients with early untreated RA, we recruited and studied five newly
diagnosed, untreated RA patients early in the course of their disease and five
age-, gender-, and race-matched control subjects. We collected serial blood
samples over 24 h and measured plasma ACTH and cortisol every 30 min and IL-6
every hour. The 24-h collection was followed by administration of ovine CRH
(oCRH) and post-oCRH serial blood samples over 2 h. We analyzed the 24-h overall 
levels of these hormones and their circadian variations and performed time-lagged
cross-correlation analyses among them. The untreated RA patients had 24 h
time-integrated plasma ACTH, plasma cortisol levels, and urinary free cortisol
excretion that were not significantly different from control subjects, in spite
of their disease activity. However, an earlier morning surge of plasma ACTH and
cortisol in the patients was suggested. Plasma ACTH and cortisol responses to
oCRH were similar in RA patients and controls. IL-6 levels were significantly
increased in the RA patients compared with control subjects during the early
morning hours (P < 0.05). There was pronounced circadian variation of plasma Il-6
levels. In the RA patients, we detected a positive temporal correlation between
plasma levels of IL-6 and ACTH/cortisol, with elevated levels of IL-6 before the 
elevations of ACTH and cortisol by 1 and 2 h, respectively. In the same patients,
we detected a negative effect of cortisol upon IL-6 exerted with a delay of 5 h. 
The data presented here suggest that although endogenous IL-6 may stimulate
secretion of ACTH and cortisol, overall activity of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis remains normal and apparently is insufficient
to inhibit ongoing inflammation in early untreated RA patients.

PMID: 9100607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. J Neurol Sci. 1997 Mar 20;147(1):43-7.

Hypercortisolism after stroke--partly cytokine-mediated?

Johansson A(1), Olsson T, Carlberg B, Karlsson K, Fagerlund M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Umeå University Hospital, Sweden.

Increased activity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis is common
early after stroke. Hypercortisolism is a prominent manifestation. Normally the
secretion of cortisol is regulated by adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), but
recently an ACTH/cortisol dissociation after stroke was reported. Cytokines may
influence the HPA axis, and plasma IL-6 levels are elevated following stroke. We 
investigated correlations between cortisol, ACTH, and cytokines, and between
blood pressure and blood hormone levels early after stroke in seven stroke
patients. All had neurological symptoms secondary to brain infarctions. Blood
samples for analysis of cortisol, ACTH, IL-6, TNF alpha, norepinephrine, and
epinephrine were collected four times daily, and 24-h blood pressure was
measured. Plasma IL-6, but not ACTH, correlated significantly to serum cortisol. 
Catecholamine levels correlated with cytokine and cortisol levels. This study
suggests that several routes for HPA-axis dysregulation is present early after
stroke. Cytokine release may play an important role in this situation.

PMID: 9094059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Ann Rheum Dis. 1997 Jan;56(1):27-31.

The timing of glucocorticoid administration in rheumatoid arthritis.

Arvidson NG(1), Gudbjörnsson B, Larsson A, Hällgren R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the timing of prednisolone administration 
might be critical in determining its effect on the diurnal rheumatoid
inflammatory process.
METHODS: 26 patients with rheumatoid arthritis were randomly divided into two
equal groups and allocated to low doses of prednisolone at either 2.00 am or 7.30
am. Because of the diurnal variation in disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis,
assessments of the two study groups were performed at 7.30 am both at the start
of the study (day 1) and after four doses of prednisolone (day 5). The study
protocol differences in the time period from the last dose of prednisolone to
assessment were 5.5 hours in the 2.00 am group and 24 hours in the 7.30 am group.
RESULTS: Administration of low doses of prednisolone (5 or 7.5 mg daily) at 2.00 
am had favourable effects on the duration of morning stiffness (P < < 0.001),
joint pain (P < 0.001), Lansbury index (P < < 0.001), Ritchie index (P < <
0.001), and morning serum concentrations of IL-6 (P < 0.01). The other study
group showed minor but significant effects on morning stiffness (P < 0.05) and
circulating concentrations of IL-6 (P < 0.05). Modest and similar improvements of
C reactive protein, serum amyloid protein A, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate
were seen in both study groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Administration of low doses of glucocorticoids with a rather short
biological half life seems to improve acute rheumatoid arthritis symptoms if it
precedes the period of circadian flare in inflammatory activity, as defined by
enhanced IL-6 synthesis. Further studies are needed to test the relative merits
of different timing protocols of glucocorticoid administration in rheumatoid
arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1752253
PMID: 9059137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Infect Dis. 1996 Nov;174(5):1040-5.

Diurnal variations in the human host response to endotoxin.

Pollmächer T(1), Mullington J, Korth C, Schreiber W, Hermann D, Orth A, Galanos
C, Holsboer F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Institute, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 1997 May;175(5):1283-4.

To investigate diurnal variations in the host response to endotoxin, Salmonella
abortus equi endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg) was given intravenously to healthy men in a
placebo-controlled design at 0900 or 1900 h. The time course of rectal
temperature and the plasma levels of tumor necrosis factor- alpha (TNF-alpha),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), and cortisol were
monitored for 11 h following the injections. The time of day did not affect the
endotoxin-induced increase in plasma TNF-alpha or IL-6. However, subjects who
received endotoxin in the evening, when endogenous glucocorticoid levels were
low, showed about twice the increases in rectal temperature and plasma ACTH and
cortisol levels as those who received endotoxin in the morning, when endogenous
glucocorticoid levels were high. These results demonstrate diurnal variations in 
the human susceptibility to endotoxin that may be due to a suppression of the
biologic effects of TNF-alpha and IL-6 by endogenous glucocorticoids.

PMID: 8896506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Acta Paediatr. 1996 Jul;85(7):798-803.

Reflex apnoea response and inflammatory mediators in infants with respiratory
tract infection.

Lindgren C(1), Grögaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Aker University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.

The reflex apnoea response to water stimulation was evaluated in infants with
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection and compared to the response in
non-infected infants who had sustained an apparent life-threatening event (ALTE) 
or were siblings of infants who had died of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). 
RSV-infected infants had a significantly (p < 0.05) reinforced reflex apnoea
response compared with non-infected infants. There was a significant negative
correlation between the concentration of interleukin 1 beta (IL-I beta) in
pharyngeal secretions and the duration of apnoea (p < 0.01). Increased clinical
severity was, however, associated with high (> 5.000 pg ml-1) concentrations of
IL-1 beta. There was no correlation between apnoea and interleukin 6. These
findings may be relevant for the understanding of why apnoea may be the
presenting symptom of RSV infection, and offer an explanation of why a proportion
of SIDS cases has a history of mild respiratory tract symptoms prior to death.

PMID: 8819544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Infect Immun. 1996 Apr;64(4):1110-15.

Influence of endotoxin on daytime sleep in humans.

Korth C(1), Mullington J, Schreiber W, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Institute, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.

Administration of endotoxin in the evening has been shown to transiently suppress
rapid eye movement (REM) and to promote non-REM sleep in humans. In a
single-blind placebo-controlled crossover design, we assessed the effects of
Salmonella abortus equi endotoxin administered intravenously in the morning on
the primary host response and on daytime sleep by use of a multiple napping
protocol in healthy volunteers. The extent of the host response achieved by 0.8
ng of endotoxin per kg of body weight given at 0900 h was comparable to that
previously reported to result from the administration of 0.4 ng/kg at 1900 h.
However, sleep was only slightly influenced. Endotoxin reduced the amount of REM 
sleep and increased REM latency. Non-REM sleep amount in the first nap, although 
not significantly changed, correlated negatively with the individual peak levels 
of interleukin-6 (r = -0.73, P < 0.05). Subjective tiredness, sleep onset
latency, total sleep time, and the amounts of slow-wave and non-REM sleep were
not affected by endotoxin throughout the entire experiment. Spectral analysis of 
the electroencephalogram obtained during non-REM sleep yielded no condition
differences. We conclude that endotoxin administration in the morning to healthy 
volunteers, while activating the host defense to the same extent as a lower dose 
that has been reported to promote non-REM sleep when given in the evening, does
not affect non-REM sleep. REM sleep suppression is, to date, the most
consistently reported effect of endotoxin on human sleep.

PMCID: PMC173891
PMID: 8606066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Mar;153(3):1080-6.

Obstructive sleep apnea syndrome and circadian rhythms of hormones and cytokines.

Entzian P(1), Linnemann K, Schlaak M, Zabel P.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik, Forschungsinstitut Borstel, Germany.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Mar;153(3):893.

Several cytokines exhibit a high degree of temporal regulation as well as
somnogenic potency (e.g., interleukin-1 [IL-1], tumor necrosis factor-alpha
[TNF-alpha]). Seeking the underlying cause of obstructive sleep apnea syndrome
(OSAS), we investigated whether circadian rhythms of cytokine release were
altered in 10 patients with OSAS. Ten healthy volunteers served as the control
population. Seven of the 10 OSAS patients were reexamined after 3 mo of therapy
with nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) mask ventilation.
Circadian cytokine release (IL-1, IL-6, gamma-interferon [gamma-IFN], TNF-alpha) 
was investigated ex vivo by short-term culture of blood samples. The circadian
rhythm of TNF-alpha release was significantly disturbed in OSAS patients:
nocturnal physiologic peaks in this cytokine had almost disappeared and an
additional daytime peak had developed. Circadian variations in IL-1, IL-6, and
gamma-IFN, and in the immunoregulatory hormones melatonin and cortisol, did not
differ from those in the controls. Because TNF-alpha is a known modulator of
sleep, and nCPAP therapy did not normalize TNF rhythms, we assume that TNF-alpha 
could well play a pathophysiologic role in OSAS. Further studies should be
directed at whether a physiopathologic and/or pathogenic link exists between
TNF-alpha and OSAS.

PMID: 8630548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Scand J Immunol. 1996 Feb;43(2):228-35.

The effect of strenuous exercise, calorie deficiency and sleep deprivation on
white blood cells, plasma immunoglobulins and cytokines.

Bøyum A(1), Wiik P, Gustavsson E, Veiby OP, Reseland J, Haugen AH, Opstad PK.

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian Defence Research Establishment, Division for Environmental
Toxicology, Kjeller, Norway.

Moderate exercise appears to stimulate the immune system, but there is good
evidence that intense exercise can cause immune deficiency. In the present study 
the authors examined the effect of continuous physical exercise (35% of VO2 max),
calorie deficiency and sleep deprivation on the immune system of young men
participating in a 5-7 days military training course. There was a two-three fold 
increase of neutrophils from day 1, the values remained high and decreased
slightly at the end of the course. Monocyte counts also increased with a pattern 
similar to that of neutrophils. Eosinophils decreased to 30% of control and
lymphocyte numbers decreased by 30-40%. All the major subgroups (CD4 T cells, CD8
T cells, B cells, NK cells) were reduced. Neutrophil function, as tested by
measuring chemotaxis, was significantly stimulated during the first days of the
course, in particular in the group with the lowest calorie intake. The mitogenic 
response of lymphocytes to PHA and Con A was variable, ranging from stimulation
during one course to no effect in another course. Serum levels of immunoglobulins
decreased significantly during the course. IgG was reduced by 6-7%, IgA by 10-20%
and IgM by 20-35%. The authors found no changes of interleukin 1, 2 and 4 during 
the course, but a (12-20%) reduction (P less than 0.01) of interleukin 6, and an 
increase (P less than 0.01) of granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor. 
Altogether the results from the ranger course present a mixed-up picture. The
non-specific phagocyte-related immunity was enhanced. On the other hand, the data
indicate that even a moderate physical activity, around the clock, caused
significant suppression of a number of parameters reflecting the status of the
specific, lymphocyte-related immunity. It is noteworthy, however, that there was 
no significantly increased infection rate during the course or in the first 4-5
weeks thereafter.

PMID: 8633203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 1996 Jan-Mar;10(1):27-30.

Immunomodulatory properties of a pineal indole hormone other than melatonin, the 
5-methoxytryptophol.

Lissoni P(1), Pittalis S, Rovelli F, Zecchini S, Casati M, Tremolada M, Pelizzoni
F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncological Radiotherapy, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Milano,
Italy.

Several experiments have suggested that the pineal gland has an antitumor
immunomodulatory action. Melatonin (MLT), the best known pineal hormone, has been
shown to stimulate anticancer immune defenses during the night, corresponding to 
the period of its maximum blood levels, whereas it has no effect during the light
phase of the day. At present, no study has been performed to investigate possible
immunomodulating properties of other pineal indoles, such as 5-methoxytryptophol 
(5-MTL), whose circadian secretion would be opposite with respect to that of MLT,
since it reaches its highest levels during the light phase of the day. In an
attempt to analyze possible effects of 5-MTL on anticancer immunity, we have
evaluated the action of 5-MTL (1 mg/ day orally at noon for 5 days) in 10 healthy
volunteers on the two fundamental suppressive and immunostimulatory cytokines,
consisting of IL-6 and IL-2, respectively. Serum levels of IL-2 and IL-6 were
measured by an immunoradiometric method. Mean serum concentrations of IL-2
significantly increased on 5-MTL therapy, whereas those of IL-6 significantly
decreased in response to 5-MTL. This preliminary study would suggest that the
less known pineal indole 5-MTL, as well as MLT, has important immunomodulatory
effects on cytokine secretions, including those involved in the antitumor immune 
response, by further confirming the essential role of the pineal as a central
regulation of biological response modifier system. Several pineal alterations
have been described in advanced cancer patients. According to the results of this
study, the simultaneous administration of MLT during the dark phase and of 5-MTL 
during the light period of the day could further contribute to correcting pineal 
functions and to pilot the host anticancer immune reaction in an antitumor
direction with respect to MLT alone.

PMID: 9049779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Wien Med Wochenschr. 1996;146(13-14):311-3.

[Clozapine, cytokines, fever and sleep].

[Article in German]

Hinze-Selch D(1), Mullington J, Pollmächer T.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Psychiatrie, Klinisches Institut, München,
Deutschland.

In 27 schizophrenic patients we investigated plasma levels of cytokines before
the initiation of treatment and after the first, second and sixth week of
treatment with the atypical antipsychotic agent clozapine. In addition, we did
polysomnographic recordings in one schizophrenic patient prior to, during and
following clozapine-induced fever. We found that independently of fever clozapine
significantly increased the plasma levels of tumor-necrosis-factor a (TNFa) and
soluble interleukin-2-receptor (sIL-2r) which were further increased by fever.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) was increased only together with fever and showed a
significant positive correlation with clozapine-induced fever. The sleep
recording of the fever night revealed severely disturbed sleep. Possible links
between the clozapine-induced release of cytokines and clozapine's effect on
night sleep are discussed.

PMID: 9012164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Dec 29;774:217-31.

Adaptation to chronic stress in military trainees. Adrenal androgens,
testosterone, glucocorticoids, IGF-1, and immune function.

Bernton E(1), Hoover D, Galloway R, Popp K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial Diseases, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.

PMID: 8597461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Biol Psychiatry. 1995 Nov 1;38(9):611-21.

Induction of cytokine synthesis and fever suppresses REM sleep and improves mood 
in patients with major depression.

Bauer J(1), Hohagen F, Gimmel E, Bruns F, Lis S, Krieger S, Ambach W, Guthmann A,
Grunze H, Fritsch-Montero R, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Freiburg University Medical School, Germany.

Beneficial effects of inflammatory events on certain psychiatric disorders,
including depression, were reported sporadically by ancient Greek physicians, but
have been described also in our times by a few psychiatrists during the past
decades. During febrile inflammatory events, mediators of the immune system such 
as interleukin-1 can be detected in the brain and may act on their respective
receptors which have also been demonstrated in the brain. Since cytokines such as
interleukin-1 have been shown in animal studies to exert sedative behavioral
effects, to be somnogenic, and to induce slow-wave sleep (SWS), we performed a
pilot study to evaluate scientifically the anecdotically reported beneficial
effects of inflammatory states on depressive disorders. Mood and sleep parameters
were monitored in seven drug-free, severely depressed patients before, during,
and after the administration of a single dose of endotoxin. All patients
responded with a short pulse of increased synthesis of the cytokines tumor
necrosis factor, interleukin-1, and interleukin-6 and elevated body temperature
for several hours. During the night following endotoxin administration, rapid eye
movement (REM) sleep was significantly suppressed, while changes in slow wave
sleep were not significant. During the next day, all patients were in a
significantly improved mood; however a rebound of REM sleep was observed in the
second night after endotoxin administration and mood worsened again during the
next days, indicating an only transient beneficial effect of the treatment.

PMID: 8573663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Jul 21;762:468-70.

Diurnal variations of plasma interleukin-6 in man: methodological implications of
continuous use of indwelling cannulae.

Seiler W(1), Müller H, Hiemke C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Mainz, Germany.

PMID: 7668560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Blood. 1995 Jul 15;86(2):832-3.

Daily variations of immunoreactive serum interleukin-6 levels in multiple
myeloma.

Bandieri E, Luppi M, Luppi G, Federico M, Sabbatini R, Torelli G, Piccinini L.

PMID: 7606015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. In Vivo. 1995 Jul-Aug;9(4):331-9.

Circadian characteristics of interleukin-6 in blood and urine of clinically
healthy men.

Sothern RB(1), Roitman-Johnson B, Kanabrocki EL, Yager JG, Fuerstenberg RK,
Weatherbee JA, Young MR, Nemchausky BM, Scheving LE.

Author information: 
(1)Rhythmometry Laboratory, St. Paul-Ramsey Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

The cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a multi-functional small peptide molecule
that is produced by various types of lymphoid and non-lymphoid cells and plays a 
central role in hematopoiesis, host defense mechanisms, and acute phase
reactions, including regulation of inflammatory and immune responses. A
high-sensitivity ELISA assay was applied to serum (S) and urine (U) samples
available from 10 men (median age = 50y, range = 46-71y) in order to compare
circadian characteristics of IL-6 between assays and in 2 biological fluids. S
and U samples were collected at 3-h intervals for 24hrs beginning at 19:00h on
May 14, 1993 (8 samples/subj) and frozen at -25 degrees C until analysis. IL-6 in
U was adjusted for time & volume (pg/hr) and assigned to midpoint of collection
interval. A significant time-effect was found by ANOVA and a high-amplitude
circadian rhythm was detected by the least-squares fit of a 24-hr &/or 24+12-hr
cosine for each assay. Higher serum IL-6 values were detected throughout the
night, with a peak at 01:00h, and lower values throughout the day, with a nadir
at 10:00h. In contrast, IL-6 values in urine were highest during the day, with a 
major peak in the afternoon at 17:30h and a minor peak at 08:30h, and lowest
values overnight, with a nadir at 23:30h. Of interest, the rhythm in urinary IL-6
concentration (pg/ml) was more prominent than hourly excretion rate (pg/hr).
Thus, endogenous IL-6 (and possibly other cytokine) levels may be significantly
influenced by their large and predictable day-night variations and the biological
fluid used.

PMID: 8555432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 1995 May;95(5 Pt 1):1029-35.

Circadian characteristics of circulating interleukin-6 in men.

Sothern RB(1), Roitman-Johnson B, Kanabrocki EL, Yager JG, Roodell MM, Weatherbee
JA, Young MR, Nenchausky BM, Scheving LE.

Author information: 
(1)Rhythmometry Laboratory, St. Paul-Ramsey Medical Center, Minneapolis, MN.

BACKGROUND: The cytokine interleukin-6 (IL-6) is a multifunctional small-peptide 
molecule that is produced by various types of lymphoid and nonlymphoid cells. It 
plays a central role in hematopoiesis, host defense mechanisms, and acute-phase
reactions, including regulation of inflammatory and immune responses.
METHODS: Because a circadian time structure has been shown to characterize nearly
every biologic function tested in human beings, including some cytokines, we
sought to investigate the 24-hour pattern of circulating IL-6 in a group of 11
clinically symptom-free men (median age, 50 years; range, 46 to 72 years). Blood 
samples were obtained every 3 hours for 24 hours (eight samples per subject), and
serum was frozen until analysis for IL-6 with a solid-phase ELISA.
RESULTS: Average IL-6 values ranged from 1.66 to 5.38 pg/ml, with lowest to
highest values within 24 hours ranging from 1.20 to 7.58 pg/ml (120% to 531%)
between subjects. On average, values were greater than the mean throughout the
night, with a peak at 01:00 hours and less than the mean throughout the day, with
a nadir at 10:00 hours. A significant time effect was found by analysis of
variance; and a high-amplitude circadian rhythm was described by the
least-squares fit of a 24-hour cosine (p < 0.001; amplitude, 41% +/- 5%;
acrophase, 02:16 +/- 00:28 hours). In addition, a positive correlation between
mean IL-6 levels and age was found (r = 0.63, p = 0.037).
CONCLUSIONS: Because monitoring of endogenous cytokine levels is suggested for
assessing immune function and pathologic condition, clinical decisions and
immunotherapies may be significantly influenced by the large and predictable
day-night variations in endogenous cytokine production and bioactivity.

PMID: 7751499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Oct;79(4):934-9.

Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activation and stimulation of systemic
vasopressin secretion by recombinant interleukin-6 in humans: potential
implications for the syndrome of inappropriate vasopressin secretion.

Mastorakos G(1), Weber JS, Magiakou MA, Gunn H, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Oct;79(4):932-3.

We recently demonstrated that sc administered interleukin-6 (IL-6) strongly
stimulates the human hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, with mild
toxicity and no hypotensive effects. In this study, we evaluated the response of 
the human HPA axis to escalating iv doses of recombinant IL-6 in six patients
with cancer and good performance status who received daily, every 8 h, three
equal doses of 0.3-30 micrograms/kg IL-6. The plasma levels of IL-6 assayed by a 
specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay during the 4 h following the first
IL-6 injection were elevated for 2-4 h, proportionally to the amount of injected 
IL-6. Administration of the cytokine was followed by marked elevations of plasma 
ACTH (53.0-98.6 pmol/L) and cortisol (824.9-1729.9 nmol/L) independently of the
IL-6 dose administered, suggesting that the doses employed were at the top of the
dose-response curve for these hormones. Interestingly, plasma arginine
vasopressin (AVP) levels were also elevated during the 2 h after IL-6 injection
in all patients who received a dose of 3 micrograms/kg or more, suggesting that
IL-6 activated the magnocellular AVP-secreting neurons and that it might be
involved in the syndrome of inappropriate AVP secretion. Cortisol elevations with
peaks similar to those observed after the first injection of IL-6 were also
detected in plasma sampled every 2 h after the second and third injections,
suggesting that there was no rapid tachyphylaxis in response to IL-6
administration. Plasma IL-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha concentrations, 
assayed by specific enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays during the 4 h after the
first IL-6 injection, were either within the normal range or undetectable,
confirming in vitro observations that IL-6 does not stimulate IL-1 beta or tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha secretion and suggesting that it exerts its effect on the
HPA axis and AVP secretion independently of them. We conclude that IL-6 is a
potent stimulator of the human HPA axis and a secretagogue of magnocellular AVP
secretion, which might be employed as a challenge test of the axis and the
magnocellular AVP neuron.

PMID: 7962300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1994 Oct;79(4):1212-4.

Interleukin-6 stimulates the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in man.

Späth-Schwalbe E(1), Born J, Schrezenmeier H, Bornstein SR, Stromeyer P,
Drechsler S, Fehm HL, Porzsolt F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.

A recent study in humans, animal studies, and in vitro data have suggested that
interleukin-6 (IL-6) stimulates the secretory activity of the
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis. In a phase II study, one female
and six male patients with metastatic renal cell carcinoma received IL-6 to
evaluate a possible antitumor effect of IL-6. This offered the possibility of
investigating the influence of IL-6 on the HPA axis in man. The subjects were
studied 1 day before, on day 1, and on day 21 of IL-6 therapy (150 micrograms
administered sc every day at 0900 h). Blood samples were taken at 0900, 1100,
1300, 1600, and 2000 h the day before, on day 1 of IL-6 therapy, 24 h after the
first IL-6 injection, and on day 21 of IL-6 treatment. Plasma ACTH and cortisol
levels promptly followed the rise of IL-6, which peaked 4 h after administration.
They were significantly (P < 0.05) higher at 1100 and 1300 h on day 1 of IL-6
therapy compared with the corresponding plasma levels the day before IL-6
treatment. Cortisol concentrations remained significantly increased at 1600 and
2000 h after IL-6 administration. Twenty-four hours after the first IL-6
administration, IL-6, ACTH, and cortisol levels had reached preinjection values. 
Although plasma cortisol levels were similar on days 1 and 21, ACTH levels were
lower on day 21 (than on day 1), but significantly elevated at 1100 h compared
with levels on the day before the first IL-6 injection. Results confirming the
very recent data of another study demonstrate a stimulating effect of IL-6 on the
HPA axis in man. They support the notion that IL-6 is one of the cytokines
involved in the interaction between the immune system and the HPA axis.

PMID: 7962296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Ann Rheum Dis. 1994 Aug;53(8):521-4.

Circadian rhythm of serum interleukin-6 in rheumatoid arthritis.

Arvidson NG(1), Gudbjörnsson B, Elfman L, Rydén AC, Tötterman TH, Hällgren R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis of a diurnal variation in circulating levels
of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and/or tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) in
rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory connective tissue diseases.
METHODS: Serum levels of IL-6 and TNF-alpha were measured at three hour intervals
from 7:30 to 22:30 in 48 patients with different rheumatic diseases as well as
ten healthy controls. In four of the patients with rheumatoid arthritis, serum
IL-6 levels were measured before and after one week of treatment with
prednisolone 15-20 mg daily.
RESULTS: IL-6 and TNF-alpha could not be detected in serum from healthy controls.
However, serum IL-6 levels were substantially increased in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Furthermore, patients with rheumatoid arthritis showed a
statistically significant circadian variation in levels of IL-6. Peak values
appeared in the morning and low values in the afternoon and evening. In contrast,
levels were low and stable in other connective tissue diseases. Levels of
TNF-alpha were low in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and high in patients
with other connective tissue diseases, but without circadian rhythm. After
treatment with prednisolone, levels of serum IL-6 decreased significantly, but
the circadian rhythm remained.
CONCLUSIONS: The circadian rhythm of circulating IL-6 might correspond to the
circadian rhythm of symptoms in rheumatoid arthritis. The diurnal variation of
IL-6, and possibly other cytokines, might explain the conflicting results
previously reported on the inter-relationship between circulating IL-6 levels and
disease activity in rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC1005392
PMID: 7944637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Clin Investig. 1994 Mar;72(4):315.

Interleukin-6 serum levels in healthy persons correspond to the sleep-wake cycle.

Bauer J(1), Hohagen F, Ebert T, Timmer J, Ganter U, Krieger S, Lis S, Postler E, 
Voderholzer U, Berger M.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatrische Universitätsklinik, Freiburg, Germany.

PMID: 8043981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Br J Haematol. 1994 Feb;86(2):439-40.

Interleukin-6 serum levels in patients with multiple myeloma.

Emile C(1), Fermand JP, Danon F.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Immunopathology Department, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Br J Haematol. 1994 Aug;87(4):883-4.

Studying the prognostic value of serum interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels in multiple
myeloma, we observed important daily variations in some patients. Therefore a
unique serum IL-6 measurement should be interpreted with caution and requires
confirmation by multiple determinations performed over a period of several days.

PMID: 8199045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Neuroimmunomodulation. 1994 Jan;1(1):14-22.

Impairment of adrenocortical function associated with increased plasma tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 concentrations in African
trypanosomiasis.

Reincke M(1), Heppner C, Petzke F, Allolio B, Arlt W, Mbulamberi D, Siekmann L,
Vollmer D, Winkelmann W, Chrousos GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Würzburg, FRG.

African sleeping sickness (SS) is a severe, potentially lethal parasitic disease.
The treatments of choice are the antiparasitic agents suramin, which is
adrenotoxic, and/or melarsoprol. We evaluated the functional integrity of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis of patients with SS before, during, and
after therapy with suramin and/or melarsoprol, in two sequential stages. First,
we employed the standard adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 1-24 stimulation test
(250 micrograms i.v.) to assess the maximal adrenocortical responsiveness of 69
patients with SS and 38 normal controls. We demonstrated paradoxically subnormal 
cortisol responses before suramin therapy [net cortisol response 60 min after
stimulation: 10.5 +/- 2.9 (mean +/- SE) vs. 17.5 +/- 1.0 micrograms/dl for
controls, p = 0.004], with 27% of the patients falling within the adrenal
insufficiency range (stimulated cortisol concentration < 20 micrograms/dl). These
responses subsequently and unexpectedly improved with suramin and/or melarsoprol 
therapy. Second, we performed a human corticotropin-releasing hormone (hCRH) test
(100 micrograms i.v.) in 68 additional patients with SS and 14 control subjects
to examine whether the glucocorticoid deficiency observed was primary and/or
secondary. Compared to controls, the ACTH and cortisol responses to hCRH were
blunted (ACTH after 60 min: 29 +/- 7 vs. 58 +/- 8 pg/ml in controls, p = 0.014;
cortisol: 15.2 +/- 1.5 vs. 19.6 +/- 0.7 micrograms/dl, p = 0.018), suggesting the
presence of secondary adrenal insufficiency. There was improvement of both ACTH
and cortisol responsiveness to hCRH with therapy, with cortisol recovery
occurring before ACTH, suggesting an additional primary component of adrenal
dysfunction in these patients.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8528879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


501. Am J Physiol. 1993 Jun;264(6 Pt 2):R1077-83.

Influence of endotoxin on nocturnal sleep in humans.

Pollmächer T(1), Schreiber W, Gudewill S, Vedder H, Fassbender K, Wiedemann K,
Trachsel L, Galanos C, Holsboer F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Munich, Federal 
Republic of Germany.

Sleepiness is a common complaint during infectious diseases, but the interaction 
between sleep and host defense mechanisms has been poorly explored in humans. We 
therefore studied the effect of endotoxin, a major pathophysiological factor in
gram-negative bacterial infections, on sleep and on parameters of the primary
host response in men. In a single-blind counterbalanced trial, 15 healthy
volunteers received either placebo or Salmonella abortus equi endotoxin (0.4
ng/kg body wt) intravenously on two separate occasions. Nocturnal sleep was
recorded, and rectal temperature and the plasma levels of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha, interleukin-6, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and cortisol were
monitored for 12 h. Endotoxin reduced the relative amounts of wakefulness (P <
0.05) and rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep (P < 0.05) and increased the relative
amount of non-REM sleep (P < 0.01). Electroencephalogram delta power during
non-REM sleep, as measured by spectral analysis, was not altered by endotoxin.
The endotoxin-induced changes in sleep structure were related temporally and
quantitatively to the increases in rectal temperature and to the release of
cytokines and neurohormones. It is concluded that cytokines and neurohormones
mediate the effects of endotoxin upon sleep. The ensuing increase in non-REM
sleep may be part of the adaptive host response to bacterial infections in
humans.

PMID: 8391756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Anaesthesist. 1993 Jun;42(6):343-9.

[Interleukin-1 beta and interleukin-6-plasma concentrations in laparotomies.
Interaction with neuroendocrine secretion and postoperative temperature
regulation?].

[Article in German]

Crozier TA(1), Müller JE, Quittkatt D, Weyland W, Sydow M, Wuttke W, Kettler D.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum Anaesthesiologie, Rettungs- und Intensivmedizin,
Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen.

Elevated body temperature, increased plasma cortisol concentrations, and loss of 
the circadian secretory pattern are typical changes observed after trauma and
surgery. We investigated the hypothesis that the interleukins IL-1 beta and IL-6 
are involved in these phenomena, since both are endogenous pyrogens and can
induce ACTH and cortisol secretion. METHODS. Eight healthy women undergoing
hysterectomy for non-malignant diseases participated in the study after having
given written consent. The study had the approval of our institution's ethics
committee. Anaesthesia was induced with fentanyl 0.1 mg and methohexitone 1.5
mg/kg and maintained with isoflurane in 60% N2O and 40% O2. Blood samples were
drawn before induction, before incision, during surgery, at the end of surgery,
and 30, 60, 120, 240 and 360 min after surgery. Cortisol, prolactin, IL-1 beta,
and IL-6 concentrations were determined with commercially available ELISAs.
Statistical analysis was performed with non-parametric methods. RESULTS. IL-6
increased significantly from 15 (4.3-23) to 68 (18-107) pg/ml (medians and range)
at the end of surgery and peaked at 128 (52-214) pg/ml 60 min postoperatively (p 
< 0.01, Table 2). Baseline IL-1 beta concentrations were 20 (1-35) pg/ml with a
significant increase in median postoperative concentrations in the postoperative 
period (p < 0.001). Prolactin increased from 22 (13-43) to 210 (115-291) ng/ml
immediately after induction of anaesthesia (p < 0.001) and remained elevated
until 240 min after surgery. Cortisol increased from 99 (26-167) to 384 (241-553)
ng/ml during surgery and reached a maximum of 475 (246-597) ng/ml 30 min
postoperatively (Table 3). Rectal and mean body temperatures increased
significantly in the postoperative period (Table 1). There was a significant
correlation between IL-6 and cortisol concentrations (r = 0.468; p < 0.001), but 
none was found between IL-6 and temperature or between IL-1 beta and cortisol or 
temperature. CONCLUSIONS. Surgical trauma markedly stimulates the secretion of
IL-6, and to a lesser extent that of IL-1 beta. The data do not yield any
evidence indicating an effect of IL-1 beta or IL-6 on body temperature.
Postoperative prolactin concentrations might be influenced by IL-6. The positive 
correlation between plasma concentrations of IL-6 and cortisol may be
coincidental, but could reflect a causal relationship, particularly in the
postoperative period during which time the circadian pattern of cortisol
secretion is disturbed.

PMID: 8342742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


503. Immun Infekt. 1993 Apr;21 Suppl 1:38-40.

[Circadian rhythm in cytokines].

[Article in German]

Zabel P(1), Linnemann K, Schlaak M.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik, Forschungsinstitut Borstel.

The well-known human circadian rhythm (CR) in body temperature may be due to CR
in endogenous pyrogens such as interleukin-1 (IL-1), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF). We, therefore, investigated the daily
variation in spontaneous and LPS-induced monokine release by peripheral blood
cells (whole blood assay) in 10 healthy volunteers. Spontaneous release of
monokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF) showed a simultaneous significant peak at noon,
whereas LPS-induced release of IL-1 and IL-6 was strictly correlated with the CR 
in body temperature with its significant maximum at 8.00 p.m. Since LPS-induced
release of TNF showed a significant peak at 4.00 a.m., interleukins and TNF seem 
to be independently regulated. CR in IL-1 and IL-6 release are suggested to be
responsible for the CR in body temperature.

PMID: 8344688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Eur Cytokine Netw. 1992 May-Jun;3(3):335-6.

Circadian rhythm of soluble interleukin-2 receptor in healthy individuals.

Lemmer B(1), Schwuléra U, Thrun A, Lissner R.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum der Pharmakologie, J.W. Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt/M, Germany.

The cytokine levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R), interleukin-6
(IL-6) and tumor-necrosis-factor alpha (TNF-alpha) were studied in 12 healthy
volunteers at 11 different times of day. TNF-alpha levels were below the
detection limit, and IL-6 levels were at baseline values of the respective assay 
used. Interindividual variations were found for the plasma levels of sIL-2R
(179-524 U/ml). Shedded IL-2 receptors displayed a pronounced circadian
phase-dependency (p less than 0.0001) with a peak value at 12:29 h and a trough
at 4:14 h when a complex cosine function (period lengths: 24 h plus 12 h) was
fitted to the data. These findings may be of importance when using sIL-2R as a
diagnostic tool as well as in controlling efficacy of drug treatment.

PMID: 1498263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1992;242(1):53-6.

Nocturnal plasma levels of cytokines in healthy men.

Gudewill S(1), Pollmächer T, Vedder H, Schreiber W, Fassbender K, Holsboer F.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, München, Federal
Republic of Germany.

Nocturnal cytokine levels were measured serially in 12 healthy male volunteers
for 12 h, including 8 h of polygraphically monitored nocturnal sleep. Plasma
concentrations of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) were determined in 30-min intervals by
enzyme-linked immunoadsorbent assays. In some subjects cytokines were not
detectable at all. In the remaining volunteers (27% for IL-1 beta, 58% for IL-6
and TNF-alpha, respectively) occasional values near to the detection limits (DL) 
of the assays could be measured. With respect to IL-1 beta and IL-6, plasma
levels above the DL were significantly more frequent during sleep than during the
preceding time of wakefulness. No temporal association with NREM or REM episodes 
could be shown. TNF-alpha values above the DL were randomly distributed across
the 12-h period investigated. It is concluded that in a considerable percentage
of healthy subjects small amounts of cytokines are released at night. Release of 
IL-1 beta and IL-6 is temporally associated with sleep, whereas the release of
TNF-alpha is not. It remains to be established whether nocturnal cytokine release
reflects either an interaction between sleep and host defense mechanisms or a
sleep-independent circadian rhythmicity.

PMID: 1390956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


506. J Neuroimmunol. 1991 Dec;35(1-3):13-9.

Benzodiazepine anesthesia in humans modulates the interleukin-1 beta, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6 responses of blood monocytes.

Taupin V(1), Jayais P, Descamps-Latscha B, Cazalaa JB, Barrier G, Bach JF, Zavala
F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U25, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

The influence of sedative and anxiolytic benzodiazepines on human monocyte
function was assessed in 11 patients undergoing anesthesia prior to control
endoscopy of the urinary tract. A single i.v. injection of 0.08 mg/kg midazolam
induced a marked and delayed inhibition of the lipopolysaccharide-induced
production of interleukin-1 beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6
by monocytes isolated from peripheral blood. Corticosteroids were not responsible
for the observed immunosuppression. These studies demonstrate that, when
administered in man, benzodiazepines markedly alter the capacity of monocytes to 
synthetize major mediators of the host inflammatory response.

PMID: 1955561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Neurology. 1990 Nov;40(11):1735-9.

Cytokine accumulations in CSF of multiple sclerosis patients: frequent detection 
of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor but not interleukin-6.

Hauser SL(1), Doolittle TH, Lincoln R, Brown RH, Dinarello CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114.

We identified the cytokines interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 beta), tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) by specific radioimmunoassays in the CSF of
patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and other neurologic diseases (OND). There 
was a high incidence of detectable IL-1 beta in patients with active MS compared 
with inactive MS or OND patients. TNF was also more frequently present in active 
MS than in OND CSF. By contrast, most MS CSF did not contain detectable IL-6.
There was no correlation between the degree of CSF pleocytosis and the level of
individual cytokines, suggesting that cytokine accumulations may be derived from 
CNS, and not CSF, cells. As IL-1 beta and TNF experimentally induce astrogliosis,
demyelination, temperature elevation, lassitude, and sleep, and results raise the
possibility that these cytokines may contribute to a variety of manifestations in
MS and in other disease states.

PMID: 2234430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]

